[1960] Taylor, Hodgkin, and Rollett.
The X-Ray Crystallographic Determination of the Structure of Bromomirestrol. 
By NOEL E. TAYLOR, DOROTHY CROWFOOT HODGKIN, and J. S. ROLLETT. 

The structure of the plant estrogen, mirestrol, in the form of its mono- bromo-derivative, has been investigated by two- and three-dimensional methods of X-ray analysis. These lead to the structure (VI), which corre- 
sponds to the chemical formula C20H22O6 and incorporates a partly reduced 
isoflaven nucleus. The bromine atom was first placed by the calculation of 
a Patterson projection along [OlO] in the monoclinic crystal structure, and 
the positions of the carbon and oxygen atoms were then found by three suc- 
cessive calculations of the three-dimensional electron-density distribution. 
The distinction between carbon and oxygen atoms in the molecule was made 
from a projection of the difference between the electron density derived with 
the observed F values and with a set calculated by assuming that all the 
atoms present (other than bromine) were carbon. 
The structure found for mircestrol appears to have interesting biogenetic 
relations and to account both for the chemical properties of the compound 
and, in general terms, for its biological activity. 

THE study of the structure of the plant Estrogen, mircestrol, described in this paper, has 
been carried out in close collaboration with Drs. D. G. Bounds and G. S. Pope, who prepared 
the active compound from the plant Pueraria mirijca found in Thailand. The use of 
X-ray methods to investigate its structure was initially suggested on account of the very 
small amount of material they could obtain. The structure now found by the X-ray 
analysis of monobromomirestrol appears to account very well for the chemical and spectro- 
scopic properties of mirestrol which they describe in the following paper.l 
Mircestrol itself was first examined crystallographically by Dr. M. S. Webster in two 
differently hydrated crystalline modifications. The molecular weight determined from 
the measured density and unit-cell dimensions agreed with the formula C20H2206, but the 
accuracy was not sufficient to rule out the alternative analytically permissible formula 
C20H2406.The complexity of the molecule was clearly too great to permit a detailed 
X-ray analysis of its structure without the introduction of a heavy atom into the molecule. 
A bromine derivative was sought, since the average scattering factor for X-rays of the 
mircestrol molecule as a whole, measured as dzj2, is approximately equivalent to that of 
a bromine atom; the monobromo-derivative, when prepared, appeared to be a suitable 
simple substitution product. 
(1) (11) (111) 
The molecular structure for monobromomircestrol (111) has been deduced by two- and 
three-dimensional methods of X-ray analysis. Initially the positions of the bromine 
atoms in the crystal were determined from Patterson projections. Two following electron- 
density projections served to place the nine additional atoms of the structural unit (I), 
and the remaining carbon and oxygen atoms were located in stages (11) and (111), through 
1 Rounds and Pope, following paper. 
Cf. Mathieson, Rev. Pure Appl. Clzem., 1955, 5, 113. 
6c 

Taylor, Hodgkin, and Rollett: The X-Ray Crysfallogyaphic 
successive calculations of the electron density in three dimensions. The distinction 
between carbon and oxygen atoms in the molecule was made by the calculation of difference 
maps. The structure (111) corresponds with the formula C20H2206 for mircestrol itself. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
Bromomirestrol was recrystallised from aqueous alcohol in thin, transparent, lath-like 
crystals, elongated along the b axis, with (001) dominating. All crystals from the first 
sample studied (type I) proved to have a disordered crystal structure. They gave sharp X-ray 
reflections of widely varying intensity, interleaved by weak diffuse reflection?. The shay 
reflections could be referred to a monoclinic unit cell of dimensions a = 7-23 A, b = 5.98 A, 
c = 20.33 A, p = 92.4" with OK0 reflections absent for k odd and two molecules in the unit cell 
(calculated density 1.65, g./c.c.). The weak diffuse reflections corresponded with a unit cell 
having a doubled and four molecules per cell. 
A later preparation of bromomirwstrol, which crystallised in much larger crystals (type 11) 
gave X-ray photographs on which all reflections were sharp, cprresponding with an ordered unit 
cell containing four molecules with a = 14.46 A, b = 5-98 A, c = 20.33 A, p = 92.4", space 
group P2, and two molecules of bromomirestrol in the asymmetric unit. 
The relation between the two types of crystal is extremely close. All the X-ray reflections 
common to the two sets of photographs are indistinguishable by eye in relative intensity. 
Further (h01) reflections when h is odd, given by type I1 crystals, are represented only by three 
very weak reflections while type I crystals give no interleaving diffuse (h01) reflections. The 
effects can be explained by small relative translations parallel to the b axis of alternate molecules 
following one another along a; these translations must occur in a regular repetitive manner in 
type I1 crystals, in a random way in those of type I. 
The structure analysis was almost complete before type I1 crystals were found and is based 
solely on the sharp reflections of type I crystals. These were treated as if they referred to a 
crystal of space group P2, with two molecules in the unit cell. 
(hkl) reflections were recorded for k = 0 to K = 4 by the multiple-film Weissenberg technique 
with a crystal of dimensions 0.11 x 0-75 x 0.009 mm., set for rotation about its needle axis. 
Exposure times of the order of 160 hr. were necessary. The intensities were estimated visually 
for the 1150 reflections recorded in this way and the data from the individual layers put on to 
the same scale by comparison with an independent set of (OM) data. Corrections for the Lorentz 
and polarisation factors were made as usual. The intensity of reflection falls off very rapidly 
with increasing k and, although reflections with k up to 7 fall within the reflection sphere of 
Cu-Kcr radiation, these higher-order terms must be relatively very small. The rapid fall-off 
in intensity in this direction is obviously associated with the disorder in the crystals, but it 
could be treated in the same way as the fall-off resulting from an anisotropic thermal movement 
of the atoms. The data were put on to an approximately absolute scale by Wilson's meth~d,~ 
Wilson plots of the individual layers being used to give values of the temperature factors normal 
and parallel to the b-axis, of B, = 2-53 x cm.2 and B2 = 8.64 x cm.2. At a later 
stage, plots of log (~F,/F,) against sin2 8, over small ranges of sin2 0, showed the difference to 
be even greater than this; the final temperature constants were found to be B, = 
2-55 x 10-1, cm.2 and B, = 11-25 x 10-16 cm.2. 
STRUCTURE ANALYSIS 
The relative scattering weight of bromine compared with that of mircestrol is very 
favourable for a direct application of heavy-atom methods of structure analysis. But, in 
the space group P2,, the relative positions of the two bromine atoms in the crystal are 
centro-symmetrical when the structure as a whole is not. Except in the single centro- 
symmetrical projection of the structure down the b axis, electron-density distributions 
calculated with phase constants derived from the bromine-atom contributions have false 
symmetry; they show peaks due to the remaining atoms in the molecule superimposed on 
those of a centro-symmetrically related mirror-image molecule, as in the analysis of 
cholesteryl i~dide.~ The main problem in the structure determination of mirestrol there- 
a Wilson, Nature, 1942, 150, 151. 
Carlisle and Crowfoot, Proc. Roy. SOC., 1945, A, 184, 64. 

[ 19601 Determination of the Structure of Bromomirmtrol. 3687 
fore turned on distinguishing in three dimensions the atoms of one molecule from its 
mirror image. 
1. The sharpened Patterson function was calculated for the (010) projection by using 
the derived F2 values and a modifying function exp (8 sin2 0/h2). The x- and x-parameters 
of the bromine atom were clearly defined by the heaviest peak present; at the end of the 
analysis it was found that all the main features of the projection were accounted for in a 
calculated map of bromine-light atom vectors. The bromine atoms were assigned the 
initial parameters 0.185, $, 0.026; 0-815, Q, 0.974. 
2. With signs based on the bromine atoms alone electron-density projections were 
calculated along the b and the a axis. 
The b-axis projection is itself centro-symmetrical. In its outline it was possible to 
recognise immediately that the bromine atom was substituted on to a (probably aromatic) The course taken was in outline as follows : 
FIG. 1. Part of the electron-density pro- 
jections (a) along [loo], (b) along [OlO], 
calculated with the bromine phase con- 
stants, The positions of the jirst nine 
atoms selected for the hkl structure-factor 
calculations are shown. The first con- 
tour is at 2elA2, the contour interval being 
approximately le/A2. The higher con- 
tours are omitted over the bromine atom. 
six-membered ring fused to a second ring. Attached to the first ring was an atom, ortho 
to the bromine atom, which seemed likely to be the oxygen of a phenolic hydroxyl group. 
Little attempt was made to interpret the remaining peak pattern at this stage. The 
complete analysis shows that it includes peaks of over 3e/A2 at every atomic position 
finally found but, in addition, six peaks of this magnitude or greater which are spurious. 
The a-axis projection shows the expected false symmetry, a centre of symmetry at the 
origin which introduces a mirror plane through the bromine-atom positions parallel with 
the b plane. By comparison with the 
b-axis projection, x, y, and x parameters were assigned to the nine atoms of the molecule 
shown in (I) and Fig. la and b, one of the two mirror-image distributions being arbitrarily 
selected in the a-axis projection. 
3. The contributions of the bromine atoms and the nine light atoms in (I) to the hkl 
structure factors were calculated, and the resulting phases used in the computation of the 
three-dimensional electron-density distribution, pl. The suspected oxygen atom at 
position 3 was weighted as oxygen, the remaining light atoms as carbon atoms. 
The inclusion of the nine light-atom contributions in the phase calculation only partly 
destroyed the false symmetry of the electron-density distribution in pl. High peaks In addition, the peaks are drawn out parallel to b. 
3688 Taylor, Hodgkin, a.nd Rollett : The X-Ray Crystallogya@hic 
occurred at each of the chosen atomic positions and there were no corresponding image 
peaks. For each of the other possible atomic positions, with the exception of those lying 
on or very near the false mirror planes, two mirror-image peaks occurred with co-ordinates 
x, y, x, and x, 8 - y, x. The peak-height relations are shown in Table 1, pl. 
A spoke model was built of the maxima in pl, and their stereochemical relations were 
examined. In general it was found that the higher of the two image peaks was more 
favourably placed stereochemically and the sites of twenty light atoms were selected. 
These are indicated in (11) and Table 1, p2. In fact, in only two of the remaining positions 
were the image peaks in pl slightly higher than the real peaks selected later. 
TABLE 1, Peak heights in e/A3 in pl, p2, and p3. 
Atom no. pl P2 P3 Atomno. pl P2 P3 
0 14 3-3 (2.9) 7.6 10.4 c 11 2.9 (1.8) 7.1 7.3 
0 18 4-0 (3.3) 4.5 (3.3) 11-3 C 14 * 4.7 7.0 7.6 c1 8.7 8.5 8-2 C 15 3.2 (2.7) 7.6 7.4 03 8.2 9.3 9.3 c9 7-4 6.7 7.6 
06 8.4 8.2 9.9 c 10 7.4 6.5 7-3 
0 15 3.1 (3.3) 4-0 (3.2) 10-4 c 12 * 3.3 5.1 6.4 
0 17 3.7 (3.4) 5.0 (3-2) 11.0 C 13 * 3.6 5.8 6.9 
c2 7-9 6.9 7.6 C 16 2.9 (3.1) 3.5 (2.7) 7.9 
c3 6-3 6.6 6.6 C 17 3.5 (2.8) 4.1 (2.6) 8.1 
c4 6.2 6.2 6-9 c 18 * 4.4 7.2 7.5 
c5 6.0 6.5 6.9 c 19 2.9 (2.6) 3.0 (1.8) 7.2 
c7 3.7 (2.8) 7.6 8.0 c 20 3.1 (1.8) 7.1 6.8 
C8 3.3 (2.3) 7.4 7-7 c 21 * 2-9 6.2 7.0 
Numbers in italics indicate peak heights of atoms not placed in the preceding phasing calculations, 
* Peaks which fall so close to the false mirror plane that real and image peaks are unresolved. the height of the image peaks being given in parentheses. 
Other than the maxima listed in Table 1 there were only three peaks in pl of height 
%/A3 or greater; all three were found to be spurious. There were two peaks of height 2.2 
and 2.3e/A3 falling almost on the z = 8 plane (see Fig. 7a), and a peak of height 3.6e/A3 
on the y = The last of these and a trough of approximately -&/A3 on the 
y = 
4. A set of (hkl) structure factors was calculated from the contributions of the bromine 
and the twenty light atoms chosen from pl. Here all light atoms were weighted as carbon 
except 0 3, oxygen. With the resulting phase constants, a second electron-density 
distribution, p2, was calculated. The peak heights observed are listed in Table 1. None of 
the atoms included in the structure-factor calculations had image peaks. For the 
six atoms omitted, there were again two peaks, one of which was now about le/A3 higher 
than the other. In their interpretation it was clear that in each case the higher peak 
was the real atom. The skeleton structure (111) was defined. 
5. Direct evidence as to which were the oxygen atoms in the molecule was obtained 
from the (010) projection. A set of (h01) structure factors was calculated in which all the 
light atoms were weighted as carbon atoms. The reliability index R was found to be 0.20 
(cf. Table 2). The electron-density projection shown in Fig. 2 was calculated, the result- 
ing signs and the observed F’s being used. Compared with the first calculatioiz there were 
12 reversals of sign, the most important of which was for the term (102) which is relatively 
large, and a further 23 small terms could be included in the calculation. The spurious 
A Fourier series with phases given by the contributions 
of atoms at (x, y, z) and (a, 7, 2) only can be expected to have a spurious minimum at (3x, 3y, 32). If 
hx + hy + 2z = 0, then the (hkl) term used is Fo(hkz) ‘OS ’, and the effect of this term at (3x, 3y, 32) 
is Fo(hkz) ‘OS “OS 30. The phase of the term is most likely to be wrong when I cos B I is small and, 
when this is so, cos 6 cos 30 is always $0. Similarly cos 0 cos 58 is 20 when I cos 0 I is small, but the 
range of 6 values for which this is true is smaller (54-126’ instead of 30-150’). It is interesting that 
the effect persists even when the phases used are based on nine out of twenty-six light atoms as well as 
the bromine atom. plane. 
plane are found to occur at Br-Br vector repeat positions.” 
* This effect can be explained as follows. 
1 cos e 1 
I COS e 1 

[ 19601 Deter.zPzinatio fa of the Structure of Bromomirmtrol. 3689 
FIG. 2. The electron density ii~ 
bromornirmtrol projected aloizg 
[OlO]. The first contour is at 
2e/A2, the contour interval being 
le/Aa except over the bromine 
atom where the interval is 5e/k2. 
, IR , 
FIG. 3. The [F, (hol) - F, 
(hol)] synthesis. All light 
atoms were weighted as car- 
bon atoms in the calculation 
of F, (hol). Zero and 
positive contours full line, 
negative contours broken line ; contour internal 
0.5e/Aa except in the region 
of the bromine atom where 
it is lelA2. 
FIG. 4. A representatiovt of the electron- 
density distribution, p3, over the region of 
one molecule viewed along [OlO]. The con- 
tours are taken from the calculated section 
nearest to each atomic centre. The contour 
interval is lelA3 with thefirst contour drawn 
at 14A3. 
3690 Tayloy, Hodgkin, and Rollett : The X-Ray Crystallogra@hic 
peaks, which had been present in the first projection, were all eliminated and there was a 
very marked improvement in resolution. An (F, - Fc) synthesis was carried out on the 
basis of the same structure-factor calculation; this is shown in Fig. 3. The pattern 
indicates several appreciable shifts of atomic positions (maximum 0.14 A) and also gives 
clear indications of the anisotropic thermal vibration of the bromine atom. In addition, 
it shows regions of the order of 2e/A2 at the positions of six of the atoms; these maxima 
were taken as indications that these were the oxygen atoms. 
TABLE 2. Reliability indices for the plane YeJEections. 
k ................................................... 0 1 2 3 4 
No. of observed reflections .................. 275 299 274 199 103 
R ................................................... 0.160 0.163 0-208 0.296 0-386 
6. A third set of hkl structure factors was calculated, based on the positions of 26 atoms, 
of which 0 3, 0 6, 0 14, 0 15, 0 17, and 0 18 were weighted as oxygen atoms. This was 
FIG. 5. A view of the molecule of 
bromomimstrol, drawn from the 
atomic positions in p3. 
OH 
followed by the evaluation of the three-dimensional electron-density distribution, p3. In 
p3, all the atoms inserted in the calculation appear as high maxima, with the peak heights 
recorded in Table 1, rather higher, as expected, over the oxygen than over the carbon 
atoms. They are shown in Fig. 4 which is a composite drawing of the electron-density 
levels near the atomic centres, projected on to the b plane. There are no longer any image 
peaks in the electron-density distribution and there are no spurious peaks of any magnitude; 
apart from the volume occupied by the atomic maxima, the only region where the electron 
density rises over 24elk3 in p3 is in the first diffraction ring surrounding the bromine atom. 
There are still smaller peaks, of the order of le/k3 or less. While many of these are clearly 
spurious, some do occur at the positions to be expected for hydrogen atoms in the mirestrol 
molecule; 15 out of the 21 hydrogen atom sites are marked in a noticeable way by peaks 
or bulges in the electron-density distribution. 
At this point, the co-ordinates of the atomic positions, defined by the maxima of p3, 
were derived by Gaussian approximations to the 19 electron-density points nearest each 

[ 19601 Determination of the Strztctuure of Bromomir~strol. 3691 
maximum. An examination of the interatomic distances defined by these positions 
showed that these were nearer expected values in the region of the first nine atoms placed 
than among those selected later. This seemed very reasonable since atomic positions in 
the first group introduced had been effectively submitted to two refining cycles, in the 
second group to one, and in the third group to none. A preferred list of co-ordinates shown 
FIG. 7. The electron-density distribution in the section at x = 25/30a in pl (a), p2 (b), and p3 (c). The 
contour interval is le/A3, starting with the le/k3 contour, except over the bromine atom where the contours 
are at 5, 10, and 15e/A3. The false mirror planes at y = & and y = 2 are indicated by broken lines. 
0- 
in Table 4 was accordingly drawn up; here the positions of the first nine atoms introduced 
are those found in p3 while the remaining positions are those of p3 modified by an n shift 
where n, = nZ = 1.3 and ny = 1.5 for atoms of the second group, n, = n, = 1-6, nny = 2.0 
for those of the third group. A view of the arrangement of the atoms in the molecule 
which follows from these positions is shown in Fig. 5; Fig. 6 records the bond lengths 
involved. The latter are, in general, in good agreement with accepted values but show 
individual deviations of up to 0.17 A which are indications only of the present state of 
approximation of the structure analysis. It is noticeable that all the larger bond-length 
deviations, four of >Ow15 A, involve one atom near the original mirror plane away from 
which movement is likely to be slowed down by mirror image effects. 
In this Figure 
a section in the three-dimensional electron-density distribution at x = 25/30a is shown The course of the analysis as a whole is illustrated by Fig. 7a, b, and c. 

3692 Taylor, Hodgkin, and Rollett : The X-Ray Crystdlogra9hic 
for pl, p2, and p3. This section passes at or near the centres of ten atoms, and illustrates 
the way in which the image peaks vanish as the corresponding atoms are included in the 
phase-angle calculations. Thus in pl, image peaks occur for all the atoms not included in 
the phasing calculations (C 7, 0 14, 0 15, C 16, and C 11) except C 13 which lies close to 
the false mirror plane. The peaks A and B are two small spurious peaks (see p. 3688). 
In p2, the only atoms omitted were 0 15 and C 16, and two image peaks occur of which the 
real peak is the higher. In p3 there are no image peaks. 
Fig. 7 shows that in p3 the electron-density peaks are drawn out parallel with the b 
axis. This is almost certainly a consequence of the disordered character of the crystals 
studied. The observed peaks represent the superposition of the atoms of two molecules 
which differ a little in their y parameters. The deviation between the mean structure 
postulated in the structure-factor calculations preceding p3 and the true structure is 
TABLE 3. Comparison of observed and calculated structure amplitudes. 

In the structure-factor calculation, temperature-fact01 
calculations of Berghuis, Haanappel, Potters, Loopstra, 
the scattering curve given in the International Tables, 
anomalous dispelsion in the K-shell. ed scattering factors were used for carbon and 
lavry, and Veenendaal (A& Cryst., 1955, 8, 
1935, was used, with a further correction of based on the 
For bromine 
electrons for , Macgil 
VOl. 11, 

[ 19601 Determination of the Structure of Bromomirmtyol. 
reflected in the character of the agreement between the observed and calculated F’s 
(cf. Table 3). The overall reliability index for the 1150 observed spectra was 19.8%, 
but the values for the individual layers listed in Table 2 show that R increases markedly 
with k. At the same time the average intensity of the X-ray reflections falls with increas- 
ing k, as shown in the section of the structure-factor calculations given in Table 3. The 
individual y-parameters of the atoms can only be considered to be known with rather low 
accuracy at present. It is clearly unlikely that they can be known with any great pre- 
cision unless the ordered crystal is examined. 
DISCUSSION 
The positions of the atoms listed in Table 4 define the skeleton structure of mircestrol 
as consisting of four six-membered rings and one five-membered ring. As described above, 
these positions have not been further refined and the bond lengths and bond angles they 
indicate are subject to quite large limits of error, particularly when they have a major 
component in they direction. However, as they stand, they appear to define the chemical 
structure of bromomiroestrol as represented by C20H21O6Br, with formula (111). 
Atom 
Br 

In outline, the evidence for this structure is as follows. Ring A, to which the bromine 
is attached, is planar and evidently aromatic. The atom attached at position 3, identified 
as oxygen, must accordingly be formulated as belonging to a phenolic hydroxyl group, 
the presence of which is supported by chemical evidence. Ring B too is essentially planar, 
but atom 6 is identified as oxygen and the ring is therefore heterocyclic. Also, of the 
substituent atoms, C 14 lies closely in the plane of ring B, C 11 markedly out of it so that 
the angles 11, 9, 10 and 11, 9, 8 are nearly tetrahedral. These features lead to the 
deduction that a double bond should be placed between C 7 and C 8, leaving C 9 fully 
substituted. The atoms 20 and 21 attached at C 11 are both carbon, and the group has 
the form of a gem-dimethyl group. The identification is supported by the existence of 
small peaks near the expected sites of hydrogen atoms attached to C 20 and C 21 and 
arranged in the most probable staggered conformation. Ring c, from its shape and 
substituents, is fully reduced; ring D is also largely reduced; the planar configuration of 
atoms 14, 15, and 16 and of the oxygen atom attached at C 15 is consistent with the formul- 
ation of this atom as ketonic oxygen. The existence of the five-membered ring, ring E, 
was not suspected until late in the analysis. As atomic positions were selected from the 
electron-density peaks in this region in $2, it was realised that the peaks representing C 19 
and C 12 were 1.98 A apart, intermediate between a bonded (1.54 A) and a non-bonded 
distance (2-5 A or more). In the first case, the structure would be as represented, in the 
second, atom 19 would presumably be formulated as a methyl group attached to ring D, 
corresponding with the alternative possible mircestrol formula, C2,H2,06. To test these 
alternatives, the atoms were placed for the structure-factor calculation, set 3,146 apart 

3694 Taylor, Hodgkin, and Rollett : The X-Ray Crystallographic 
at positions slightly displaced from the peak maxima of p2. It was expected that, if 
there were a bond between C 19 and C 12, the peaks representing these atoms would move 
together and this proved to be the case. Their separation is 1.75 A in p3, and drops to 
1.70A on applying the n shifts as in Table 4 co-ordinates; though this value is still a 
little high, there is no doubt that C 12 and C 19 are bonded. It is presumably the existence 
of ring E which forces a markedly boat-shaped conformation on ring D and the slightly 
FIG. 8. The arrangement of the molecules in the crystal structure of bromomira?strol projected 
(a) on OlO), (b) on (100). 
d 
boat-shaped conformation on ring c. The substituent atoms at C 14, C 17, and C 18 are all 
identified as oxygen; from their geometry they belong to hydroxyl groups, three or more 
of which are indicated by the chemical evidence. 
The arrangement of the molecules in the crystal provides some confirmation for the 
character of the different active groups present. A series of short contacts, corresponding 
in length with hydrogen bonds, can be traced running between the 15-keto-group and the 
17-hydroxyl group (2.77), then OH 17-OH 18 (2-75 A) and OH 18-OH 14 (perhaps a little 
long) (3.04 A), as shown in Fig. 8. Small peaks occur in these bonds near the suspected 
positions of the hydroxyl-hydrogen atoms. At the opposite end of the molecules, how- 
ever, the distance apart of the phenolic hydroxyl groups of neighbouring molecules, 
required by the parameters of Table 4, places these groups 344A apart, too far for any 

[ 19601 Determination of the Strmkwe of Bromomimstrol. 3695 
hydrogen bond to be formed between them. Their distance from neighbouring bromine 
atoms is rather shorter (3-32 A) and could correspond with weak attraction. But one can 
see that the two hydroxyl groups might themselves be brought into hydrogen-bonded 
contact by a bodily translation of alternate molecules, &-$A parallel with b. This 
would modify the character of the contacts at the opposite ends of each molecule; the 
distance between OH 17 groups in molecules 2 and 4 of Fig. 8 would decrease and could 
become the shortest in the structure. It seems possible that it is this situation, that there 
are alternative ways of making hydrogen-bonded contacts between the molecules, that is 
responsible for the disorder in crystals of type I and the consequent elongated peaks of p3. 
Clearly the preferred hydrogen-bonded arrangement could be found by a detailed analysis 
of the ordered crystals of type 11. 
Biogenetically, it seems possible to dissect the mircestrol nucleus into an isoprene unit 
consisting of CH, 20, CH, 21, C 11, C 12, and C 19 and a partly reduced isoflaven nucleus 
(VI). This dissection relates it, on the one hand, to the many plant products in which 
isoprene units are found linked in various ways to condensed ring systems (cf. Robinson 6, 
and, on the other, to isoflavones such as genistein (IV) , and isoflavenes, such as 4-ethyl- 
7,4’-dimethoxy-2-methylisoflav-3-en (V), which have estrogenic properties. Both 
in these compounds and in mircestrol (VI) the biological potency is clearly not significant 
OH 
of any structural relation of the molecular skeleton present to the steroids. It seems to be 
a consequence of an accidental geometrical similarity in the positions of the hydroxyl 
groups, or potential hydroxyl groups, at the two ends of each molecule. In mircestrol, the 
actual distance given by the co-ordinates in Table 4 between the 3-OH and the 18-OH is 
10.57 A, closely the distance to be expected from models of the 3-OH to the 17-OH of 
oestradiol. The disposition of the second terminal hydroxyl group at C 17 of mirestrol 
(10.91 A from the 3-OH group) is rather more different in its relative position from the 
second, 16-OH group of cestriol; it is worth observing that mircestrol is the more potent 
oes trogen. 
The calculations necessary to establish the structure of mircestrol were carried out partly on 
punched-card machines supplied by British Tabulating Machines Ltd., and partly on Deuce at 
the National Physical Laboratory with the help of the staff of the Mathematics Division. The 
research was assisted by a grant from the National Research and Development Corporation. 
N. E. T. is indebted to the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation for 
the award of an overseas studentship, and J. S. R. thanks the Pressed Steel Company for a 
research fellowship. 
