© 1975 Nature Publishing GroupNature Vol. 255 May 8 1975 
news and views 
Two very beautiful papers on insulin 
appeared in Scientia Sinica in December 
1974 (17, 752 and 779). They continue 
a sequence of scientific publications 
which began in 1961 and includes the 
total synthesis of sheep insulin, 
described in 1965. They are published 
by groups of research workers in 
China: in Peking in the University 
(Departments of Biochemistry and 
Organic Chemistry) and in the Institute 
of Physics of the Academia Sinica, in 
Shanghai in the Institutes of Organic 
Chemistry, Biochemistry and, most 
recently, Zoology. They provide im­
pressive evidence of integrated re­
searches in different disciplines and 
laboratories . 
The first of the present two papers 
describes the derivation of an electron 
demity map of insulin in rhombo­
hedral 2-Zinc insulin crystals at 1.80 A 
resolution. It gives useful experimental 
details of the preparation of the crystals 
and heavy atom derivatlves, of the 
measurement and interpretation of the 
X-ray diffraction data and of the stages 
of solution of the structure . The model 
and electron density map (clearly of 
very good quality) are illustrated in 
colour and the atomic arrangement is 
described in detail. Ramachandran 
plots and a plot of the distribution of 
Cy side chain atoms viewed along 
Ca-C/3 illustrate some of the stereo­
chemistry observed. 
The structure is essentially the same 
as that found in parallel crystallo­
graphic studies in Oxford; indeed, in 
1972, in Peking, we compared in detail 
our earlier electron density maps, both 
drawn at a scale of 1 cm to 1 A. There 
was actually a moment of acute con­
cern when we put the maps together 
first and they did not fit-until we 
realised one was upside down compared 
with the other. We then saw that there 
was very good correspondence, if not 
exact agreement, between them. 
Correspondingly now, in the insulin Chinese work 
on insulin 
from Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin 
dimer, molecule I Peking is molecule II 
Oxford, and molecule I Oxford is 
molecule II Peking. 
One might not wish, in aU cases, to 
see complete duplication of the X-ray 
analysis of a protein molecule-so much 
work is involved. But there are great 
gains in the present case from having 
two views of the insulin crystal struc­
ture. First, insulin is such an odd mole­
cule and the situation in the crystal is 
very curious. The two insulin molecules 
in the 'asymmet,ric uni,t a,re very similar 
to one another, yet appear to differ in 
conformation in a number of details; it 
is comforting to see how closely the 
molecules described in the Chinese 
papers agree with Oxford findings. 
Earlier small differences between us are 
diminishing; it may well be that the 
final comparison will give us reliable 
estimates of the errors we must expect 
in general in placing atoms from X-ray 
data on proteins. The present Peking 
map at 1.80 A resolution is the most 
accurate map available of the insulin 
electron density defined by experi­
mental, isomorphous phase angles­
and may well remain so. The calcula­
tions we are carrying out at Oxford, 
designed to show the electron density 
at 1.50 A resolution, depend on the 
extension of the phases from 1.9 to 
1.5 A by various computing procedures, 
some very experimental. The total 
cross checking of our operations by 
the Peking analysis when we come to 
compare atomic coordinates should be 
very valuable. 
Many of the comments made by the 103 
Chinese insulin research group on their 
findings are similar to ones we have 
made ourselves, but they often add 
illuminating details and occasionally 
recognise quite different features-for 
example, they realised that the dihedral 
angles of the glycine residues, BS, B20 
and B23, were all in the region allowed 
for D residues. This led directly to 
experiments by the Shanghai chemists 
and biochemists who showed that B23 
might be replaced by D-alanine in the 
insulin sequence with only partial loss 
of biological activity, whereas activity 
vanishes when B23 is replaced by 
L-alanine. 
The second paper carries a stage 
further the study of structure-activity 
relations in the insulin field through 
direct measurements of the interaction 
of insulin and insulin analogues with 
receptor prot.eins in liver and fat cells. 
It, too, parallels and extends work in 
other laboratories. 
Soluble receptor protein preparations 
were made by the method of 
Cuatrecasas, of fat cells by a new 
method avoiding collagenase. It was 
found that despentapeptide insulin had 
almost the same binding capacity as 
insulin, while deshexapeptide insulin 
and the corresponding molecule with 
B23 replaced by D-alanine had reduced, 
but definite, binding capacity. The 
results strengthen the view that the non­
polar residues of the B chain surface, 
B 12, B 16, B24 and B2S, are important 
in receptor binding and that the loop 
B2~B23 and pe'rhaps alIso the salt 
bridge A21-B22 assist in stabilising the 
conformation jon this'I'egion . There is a 
nice discussion in the first paper of the 
part that conformational variability 
may play in assisting membrane binding 
in this part of the insulin molecule. 
It will be splendid if we can some 
day soon all meet and talk over the 
very interesting observations that are 
accumulating, East and West, on the 
structure and function of insulin. 
Revising the Cainozoic polarity record 
from D. H. Tarting 
Now that the main plate tectonic band 
wagon has passed, the dust can be 
brushed off the marine magnetic anom­
alies that were so effective in getting 
it rolling. It is now possible to examine 
in more detail the record they providc 
of past geomagnetic changes and to refine the time scale of polarity 
changes. 
The polarity time scale of Heirtzler 
et al. (J. geophys. Res., 73, 2119; 1968), 
based on anomalies recorded on profile 
V-20 SA in the South Atlantic, has 
stood up remarkably well. Profile V-20 SA was chosen as the longest available 
with no marked evidence of changes 
in the rate or direction of spreading, 
and the anomalies were dated by 
assuming that the observed spreading 
rate at the ridge axis-1.9 cm yr-1-had 
remained unchanged for the past 
