PERSPECTIVES
her fascination with the patterns and symme-
try of the mosaics of an ancient floor in
Jerash, Palestine, which were being catalogued
carefully before they could be removed and
taken to safety.
The start of protein crystallography
Dorothy entered the rarefied world of sci-
ence in 1928, when she went to Somerville
College, Oxford Univ ersity, UK, to readchem istry (for her first chemistry paper,
see REF. 2 ). She was captivated by the beauty
of crystals and was delighted to be moving
to Cambridge University, UK, in 1932 to
work for her doctorate with J. D. Bernal
(universally known as ‘Sage’) — a young,
politically controversial, new appointee in
structural crystallography. It was in
Bernal’s lab that Dorothy studied biologi-
cal molecules for the first time using X-ray
techniques (for example, see REF. 3 ), and it
was, in her own words, “a time rich with
new discoveries” .
In 1934, they received crystals of the
enzyme pepsin ,which had been grown by
John Philpott in the laboratory of Theodor
Svedberg (Uppsala University, Sweden). It
was while using them that Bernal discovered
the importance of not allowing protein crys-
tals to become dry, but to maintain them with
their mother liquor in order to obtain sharpThe components of cells are molecules —
non-living structures that are built up of
atoms. It was Dorothy Hodgkin’s life’s work
to determine the three-dimensional
structures of many biologically important
molecules using the relatively new technique
of X-ray diffraction. For this pioneering work,
she was awarded the Nobel Prize for
Chemistry in 1964.
It would be impossible to write anything
about Britain’s only female, science Nobel
Laureate — Dorothy Hodgkin (FIG. 1) —
without some reference to her early life (see
TIMELINE ). Dorothy was born in Cairo, Egypt,
in 1910 when her father — John Crowfoot —
was working in the Egyptian Education
Service, and Dorothy spent much of her
young childhood travelling with her parents
in the Middle East1.Her mother, Molly,
returned to the United Kingdom with
Dorothy and her two sisters at the outbreak of
war in 1914, but Molly soon returned to
Egypt to join her husband, leaving the girls
with their nurse and older relatives. The war
separated many families, and Dorothy often
attributed her independent spirit to this
period in her childhood; she did not regard it
as neglect by her parents, but simply a conse-
quence of war. There are many happy stories
of the expeditions and excursions that
Dorothy and her sisters had with their parents
in Egypt and the Sudan. In particular, the
story of Dorothy’s ‘discovery’ of the mineral
ilmenite (a mixed oxide of iron and tita-
nium) when trying to pan for gold in a
muddy stream near their house, and also of
NAT URE REVIEWS |MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 4 |NOVEMBER 2003 | 891Dorothy Hodgkin and her
contributions to biochemistry
Judith A. K. HowardTIMELINE
Figure 1 | Dorothy and Thomas Hodgkin at the Nobel Prize celebration, Stockholm, Sweden,
1964. This photograph was kindly provided by the Hodgkin family.
© 2003        Nature  Publishing Group
892| NOVEMBER 2003 |VOLUME 4  www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbioPERSPECTIVES
activity present after irradiation of the crys-
tals. This was to convince some chemists
that this was not a degradation product or a
rearrangement of the alternative, chemically
closely related, thiazolidine-oxazolone
structure, which had simply resulted from
exposure of the penicillin crystals to X-rays
(for further information, see REFS 8,9 ).
The vitamin-B12 story
Dorothy’s next challenge was vitamin B12 —
the anti-pernicious-anaemia factor that was
discovered in 1926. It was not isolated and
purified, however, until 1948, which is when
Dorothy obtained crystals from Lester Smith
(Glaxo Laboratories, UK), who was then
interested primarily in their optical proper-
ties. Dorothy immediately photographed the
beautiful red crystals (FIG. 2a) and was able to
determine the molecular mass from these
X-ray results10.She was also able to deduce,
from the optical characteristics of the crystals,
that the molecules contained highly absorb-
ing planar groups, which were similar, but not
identical, to the porphyrin-ring system. It was
Dorothy’s crystallographic work11that even-
tually determined the chemical composition
of this planar group, which was subsequently
termed the ‘corrin’ ring (FIG. 2b) .
There was very little known about the vita-
min-B12 structure or even its chemical com-
position when the crystals were first prepared,
but Dorothy was delighted to discover that
the molecule contained a cobalt atom (FIG. 2b) .
She then knew — from her earlier work on
cholesteryl iodide12,and also the heavy-atom
derivatives of penicillin9that she’d used so
successfully for phasing the reflection data —The X-ray structure of penicillin
Dorothy was a great pioneer in this new
field of crystallography and she suggested
that structure determination for complex
molecules might be carried out by X-ray
crystallography rather than by traditional
chemical means5.At this time, there were
vigorous and constant debates between
chemists about the structures of natural
products, and it was into this background
that Dorothy was moving with ideas that
would change the face of modern textbooks
and structural chemistry; for example, with
her extensive studies of the many sterol
structures6.Imagine the excitement as it
became clear that, not only had the struc-
ture of penicillin been solved in Dorothy’s
laboratory at Oxford University in the mid-
1940s (in conjunction with data from the
laboratory of Charles Bunn at the ICI labo-
ratories), but also that this had been
achieved both in the absence of a known
chemical formula and in some contradic-
tion to suggested chemical evidence7.
Penicillin was not expected by some to have
the β-lactam structure. The two proposed
structures were the thiazolidine-oxazolone
and the thiazolidine- β-lactam, and the lat-
ter,correct structure comprises one five-
membered, sulphur-containing ring fused
to a f our-membered β-lactam ring. The
small ring introduces a certain amount of
strain into the structure and was not
thought to be possible by some chemists at
the time, but it became clear from X-ray
studies, and later from other evidence, that
this was indeed the case. However, it was nec-
essary to show that there was still antibioticdiffraction spots on X-ray photographs.
Dorothy worked hard to characterize the new
crystals. From her photographs, they deduced
that the enzyme comprises,“oblate spheroidal
molecules with diameters of 35 and 25 Å,
arranged in hexagonal nets” , as well as a sig-
nificant number of water molecules that had
co-crystallized in the lattice. Most signifi-
cantly, from the intensity of the diffraction
spots, they were able to conclude that the
“arrangement of the atoms is also of a per-
fectly definite kind” . The summary of the
short paper4that was published on this work
states that,“now that a crystalline protein has
been made to give X-ray photographs, it is
clear that we have the means of checking
them and by examining the structure of all
crystalline proteins, arriving at far more
detailed conclusions about protein structure
than previous physical or chemical methods
have been able to give” . This 1934 paper4
marked the beginning of protein crystallogra-
phy and it starts with the amazing phrase,
“Four weeks ago, Dr Glen Millikan brought
us some crystals of pepsin…” . It would be
hard to find such an opening to any publica-
tion in today’s highly pressured reviewing cli-
mate. Millikan was a young American who
was visiting Svedberg’s lab. He knew Bernal
well and his father was the Nobel laureate
Robert Millikan. When he saw the crystals, he
knew Bernal would love to have them, so car-
ried them to Cambridge. Dorothy and Bernal
also showed experimentally that the notable
loss of diffraction intensity during exposure
to the X-ray beam did not result from a loss of
biological activity, but was due to changes in
the crystalline lattice.Dorothy is born in
Cairo, Egypt (the
eldest of four sisters).She moves to
Cambridge University,
UK, to work with 
J. D. Bernal.
Dorothy enters Somerville
College, Oxford University,
UK, to read chemistry (for
her first chemistry paper,
see REF. 2).Dorothy publishes a
paper on the enzyme
pepsin with Bernal4.
She returns to
Oxford University to
a Fellowship at
Somerville College.Dorothy takes the first
X-ray photographs of
insulin crystals22.Dorothy marries
Thomas Hodgkin.Dorothy and J. D.
Bernal publish many
significant sterol
structures (for
example, see REF. 6).Dorothy begins to work
on naturally occurring
antibiotics (for further
information, see REF. 5).
Her first child
Luke is born.Dorothy gains a
Ph.D. for her
thesis on sterol
structures.Her second child
Elizabeth is born.Dorothy publishes the first
three-dimensional structure of
a biochemically important
molecule (cholesteryl iodide)12.1910 1928 1932 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1941 1944 1945Timeli ne | Some important dates in the life of Dorothy Hodgkin
Dorothy solves the structure
of penicillin, but the work is
not announced because of
the war.
© 2003        Nature  Publishing Group
PERSPECTIVES
that the structure of vitamin B12 could be
solved. So, she immediately began to work on
this with member s of her research group at
Oxford University, including Jenny Pickworth
(now Glusker) and John Robertson. Dorothy
also realized, however, that unlike some of her
earlier, smaller structures, this one was far too
complicated to be solved from a series of two-
dimensional projections and that she must
calculate her F ourier maps for vitamin B12
in three dimensions. With the cobalt atom
present, she knew it was possible, in princi-
ple, to solve this structure, but it was
nonetheless an enormous challenge at that
time. She also decided, rather characteristi-
cally and diplomatically, that the “problem
was large enough for two groups to work
on” and that “these two should keep in
touch” . So, this was done with the group of
John White, who worked at Princeton
University, USA, on crystals that were pro-
vided by Merck Company, USA (for further
information, see REF. 13 ).
Dorothy suggested that it might be possi-
ble to prepare other variants of vitamin B12
— first, by feeding microorganisms with the
appropriate mutant imidazoles and, second,
by making the sulphocyanide and the seleno-
cyanide derivatives (for further information,
see REF. 14 ) — in the hope of creating an iso-
morphous series to assist in the structure
solution. By doing this, she laid the founda-
tion of the selenomethionine-substitution
method that has been extremely successful in
protein crystallography in recent years, and
also showed that heavy atoms can be intro-
duced into proteins using microbiological
techniques. In addition to these derivatives,
NAT URE REVIEWS |MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 4 |NOVEMBER 2003 | 893Her third child
Toby is born.
Lester Smith
gives vitamin-
B12 crystals to
Dorothy.Dorothy publishes
the definitive paper
on the penicillins9.A partial structure of
vitamin B12 is reported by
Dorothy and colleagues
(for the relevant
publication, see REF. 14).Dorothy visits Moscow,
Russia, for the first time.
The complete structure of
vitamin B12 is published15.A 5.5-Å-resolution structure
of haemoglobin is published
by Max Perutz and
colleagues (REF. 34).The structure of insulin
is solved by Dorothy
and colleagues26.
Dorothy publishes
early vitamin-B12
results10.Dorothy presents the
advanced stages of the
structure of vitamin B12 at
the International Union of
Crystallography Congress
in Paris, France.John Kendrew and
colleagues publish a 
6.0-Å-resolution structure of
myoglobin (see REF. 33 and
earlier references therein).Dorothy wins the Nobel
Prize for Chemistry29.In July, Dorothy dies
at home in Illmington,
Warw ickshire, UK1946 1948 1949 1950 1953 1954 1955 1958 1960 1964 1969 1994
ab
Figure 2 | Vitamin B12 . a| Vitamin-B12 crystals, natural and synthetic (see REF. 13 and references
therein). These photographs are from Dorothy Hodgkin’s collection and were kindly provided by the
Hodgkin family. b| The structure of vitamin B12 (for more information, see volume II of REF. 5 ). The
corrin ring can be seen at the centre of this strucuture. This figure was reproduced with permission
from REF. 15 © (1955) Macmillan Magazines.
© 2003        Nature  Publishing Group
894| NOVEMBER 2003 |VOLUME 4  www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbioPERSPECTIVES
for many medical applications, such as the
treatment of megaloblastic anaemia. The
knowledge of the structure also led to the elu-
cidation of the biosynthesis of the vitamin
and its co-enzymes.
The insulin story
Late in 1934, soon after moving back to
Oxford University, Dorothy’s studies on the
structure of insulin started when she
obtained a small sample of the protein from
Robert Robinson, who knew of her work on
pepsin in Bernal’s lab. The task was formi-
dable, because the evidence from Svedburg
was that the molecular weight was ~36,000
and that this could dissociate into species
with a molecular weight of 12,000 (determi-
nation of the amino-acid sequence by Fred
Sanger in the 1950s demonstrated that the
molecular weight was, in fact, 6,000; see
below). Not deterred, Dorothy started to
work on the main study of her life’s research.
She succeeded in producing good-quality
crystals (FIG. 3) and, when she developed the
very first X-ray photographs of these tiny
insulin crystals, she said that it was,“proba-
bly the most exciting [moment] in my life” .
Dorothy described how elated she was at first
and then how exceedingly worried sheprograms, which were expected to be able to
perform crystallographic calculations in
hours instead of weeks. Dorothy was working
on the structure of vitamin B12 at the time
and, although extremely enthusiastic, she was
cautious and tested the UCLA system using an
earlier dataset from calciferol for which she
knew the structure17,18.This worked brilliantly,
so they started work on the vitamin-B12
structure by sending the data and the subse-
quent results across the Atlantic using sur-
face mail. However, it all became far too
exciting for such slow communications and
Dorothy then insisted on airmail parcels19.
After almost two years of hard computa-
tional work, mostly during the night when
there was less demand for the computer, they
were able to announce their incredible
progress on the structure of vitamin B12 at
the International Union of Crystallography
(IUCr) Congress in Paris in 1954. In our age
of rapid electronic communications, such
patience is hard to conceive, but crystallogra-
phers still continue to work night shifts —
for example, on computers and various
instruments in neutron and synchrotron
facilities — all over the world.
The solution of the vitamin-B12 structure
(FIG. 2b) was truly a ‘tour de force’ and was rec-
ognized as such by many, but not by all.
Dorothy is reputed to have felt moved to
defend openly the fact that the derivation of
the chemical formula and the three-dimen-
sional (3D) structure was indeed hers and a
totally crystallographic one and not a chemi-
cal one, as others implied by omission. She
wrote to Ken Trueblood late in 1954, after
more than a year of computing across the
Atlantic and with the previously unknown
ring structure almost complete, that “it seems
to us that a very remarkable situation here is
developing — the whole structure of a large
molecule, chemically unknown is coming out
by X-ray analysis…” . Perhaps it is not surpris-
ing, with hindsight, that X-ray crystallography
found the solution for molecular structure
ahead of any chemical degradative methods.
The structure was very large and complex
(~100 non-hydrogen atoms) and the many
steps involved in chemical degradation were
exceedingly difficult to achieve at that time
(for further information, see REF. 5 ).
However,the determination of the struc-
ture of vitamin B12 enabled its complete
chemical synthesis, including its nine chiral
centres, in a mammoth effort by more than
100 chemists working with Albert
Eschenmoser20at the ETH (Eigenössische
Technische Hochschule), Zurich, Switzerland,
and with Robert B. Woodward at Harvard
University, USA. This was immensely importantshe worked with Jenny Pickworth and John
Robertson on the hexacarboxylic-acid
crystals13,15,which came from a degradation
product that contained only the ring system
and the cobalt atom. From the structure that
was determined using these crystals16,they
proved conclusively the precise nature of the
corrin nucleus (FIG. 2b) .
Dorothy always espoused, most enthusi-
astically, the latest advances in X-ray crystal-
lography, knowing that each one would bring
her, and others, closer to the point where
macromolecular structure determination
would become ‘routine’ . She was delighted,
therefore, to meet Ken Trueblood from the
University of California Los Angeles (UCLA),
USA, in the early 1950s, because he had
access to one of the most powerful comput-
ers in the world (National Bureau of
Standards Western Automatic Computer).
He was looking for significantly large X-ray
datasets from complex structures to test hisFigure 3 | Insulin crystals. a | Some of the
original insulin crystals. This figure was
reproduced with permission from  REF. 31 © (1958)
Munksgaard. b| Later insulin crystals. This figure
was kindly provided by G. G. Dodson, University
of York, UK.
a
b
Figure 4 | The molecular structure of insulin.
The figure shows the molecular structure of
insulin, including the partitioning from hexamer to
dimer to monomer that, in turn, comprises
subunits A and B. This figure was reproduced with
permission from REF. 32 © (1974) The Royal
Society.
Hexamer
Dimer
Monomers
Subunits
A and B
© 2003        Nature  Publishing Group
PERSPECTIVES
resulting data sets. These studies all provided
important lessons, because, in them, Dorothy
had described the first direct evidence that
insulin and lactoglobulin, and presumably
other globular proteins, conserve their 3D
structure independently of their crystalline or
solution state. These detailed observations
and her inspired interpretation were crucial
for understanding the structures and proper-
ties of proteins, and they laid important foun-
dations for future work.
The solution of the full insulin structure
was indeed beyond the techniques and instru-
mentation available at the time and was not
seriously revisited by Dorothy until the mid-
1950s. By then, the chemical sequence of
insulin had been determined by Fred Sanger
and colleagues, and heavy-atom derivatives of
myoglobin and haemoglobin were being pre-
pared and studied by John Kendrew and Max
Peru tz, respectively, at Cambridge University.
There were problems in getting heavy-atom
derivatives for insulin, and it was not without
some difficulties — the crystals often shat-
tered in the attempts — that these heavy-
metal substitutions were achieved25.
Early experiments to produce cadmium
insulin gave only poor crystals, but heavy-
atom derivatives for insulin were re-visited by
Margaret Adams and Guy Dodson (Oxford
University) in the 1960s. New data helped to
extend the phases of the 2Zn insulin by
exploiting the anomalous scattering in the
diffraction data. During the late 1950s and
1960s, a great deal of work was done in devel-
oping new methods and in writing programs
that would allow the exploitation of anom-
alous-scattering effects, and Patterson rota-
tion and translation functions, and, despite
relatively slow progress, Dorothy did not once
lose her belief that the insulin structure would
be solved one day.became in case the diffraction that she had
seen the night before hadn’t originated from
a protein. She therefore rushed into the labo-
ratory early the next morning to perform
further tests, and was relieved to find that
she was right — she had indeed taken the
first X-ray photograph of crystals of the pro-
tein insulin21.
The lessons learnt in the pepsin work —
namely to keep crystals ‘wet’ with mother
liquor — were used again with insulin,
although the dry rhombohedral crystals
proved stable enough to obtain data to 6-Å
resolution. In addition, data were collected
with different metal atoms incorporated into
the crystal structures, the first of which was
zinc. J. Schlichtkrull found that a minimum
of two zinc (2Zn) atoms per hexamer were
necessary for crystallization in the rhombo-
hedral form22.Once Dorothy had collected
data from air-dried and wet insulin
crystals23,she set about the formidable task
of calculating the Patterson functions for
both sets of 3D data. Patterson functions are
mathematical functions that use the experi-
mental data directly and that, in theory, pro-
vide solutions for the crystallographic phase
problem, but this was certainly not possible
for biological molecules at this time.
Nonetheless, Dorothy decided that some
useful information could be gleaned and set
about proving this was the case. The small
differences that Dorothy had observed in the
original diffraction patterns and then subse-
quently in the 3D Patterson maps, which shehad painstakingly calculated over several
years, might so easily have been overlooked by
other researchers. However, she was able to
interpret the subtle changes in the orientation
of the intramolecular vectors between the ‘wet’
and ‘dry’ maps as being due to changes in the
water structure, the loss of water on drying
and consequently the degraded crystallinity, and
not due to any significant changes in the struc-
ture of the protein itself. At about the same
time, together with Dennis Riley — an under-
grad uate student at Oxford University, who
then became Dorothy’s first D.Phil. student —
Dorothy had obtained data from ‘wet’ and
‘dry’lactoglobulin crystals24,and they per-
formed 3D Patterson calculations on the
NAT URE REVIEWS |MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 4 |NOVEMBER 2003 | 895Box 1 | International relationships
Dorothy visited China in 1959 at a time when it was not easy for scientists from the West to do so
(see BOX 2 ), and had set up a very positive collaboration on insulin with the group of Dong-Cai
Liang in Beijing. Liang had worked at Oxford University, UK, in 1966, seeking heavy-atom
derivatives of insulin, and Dorothy revisited China and this group several more times to discuss
and compare their independent progress30.Her final visit was in 1993 for the sixteenth Congress
of the International Union of Crystallography almost a year before she died. The Chinese
crystallographic community has never forgotten Dorothy’s interest and interaction with them.
The same can be said of India and other countries — she encouraged these scientists at a time
when they were being essentially neglected by the West.
Dorothy had an international group of co-workers and a great sense of human rights, freedom
of information and world peace. In 1953, she was refused entry to the United States to attend an
early protein meeting in Pasadena that was organized by Linus Pauling, because it was decided
that she had ‘leanings to the left’ , as judged by the company she kept in Cambridge and the
societies to which she belonged. Dorothy had naively written all her various societies and
connections on her visa application form and, together with her associations through J. D. Bernal
(universally known as ‘Sage’) and her husband Thomas Hodgkin (who were known to be
sympathetic to the communist viewpoint), Dorothy was rendered ‘statutorily inadmissible’ . (In
fact, from late 1957 onwards, there remained difficulties for Dorothy to enter the United States
and she had to apply independently for each trip asking that her ‘statutorily inadmissible’ status
be waived.) As a result of this refusal, she made her first, and very memorable, trip to Russia with
Bernal in 1953. This was a difficult time for East–West relationships and, despite Dorothy’s best
attempts to cross the political and scientific boundaries, she came up against the obstacles of
bureaucracy and prejudice.
Box 2 | Pugwash and the International Union of Crystallography
From 1975–1988, Dorothy was the President of Pugwash — a collection of scientists from almost
every country in the world who, after the Second World War, set up conferences on ‘Science and
World Affairs’ in the hope of avoiding such disasters and human suffering on this enormous scale
again. Dorothy, like many scientists at the time, knew people who had died or suffered as a result
of the atomic bomb being dropped on Japan. She was deeply committed to world peace, hoping
that this could be achieved through debate rather than wars, and she believed that scientists
should have a serious role in this endeavour.
She was President of the International Union of Crystallography (IUCr) from 1972–1975 and,
in this capacity, she campaigned for important scientific countries — which had been excluded
by politics — to be included in this Union. She regarded the triennial IUCr congresses as
important for fostering international relationships, as well as for creating and supporting a
buoyant and successful, albeit relatively young, scientific community. The IUCr was founded in
1946, and mainland China was admitted to the Union only after Mao Zedong died (Mao Zedong
was the founder and leader of the People’s Republic of China until his death in 1976, and the next
IUCr meeting after this was in Warsaw, Poland, in 1978). However, Dorothy maintained her
interaction with Chinese crystallographers throughout the ‘cold’ period (see BOX 1 ) and also
facilitated their return to the Pugwash conferences in the 1980s.
© 2003        Nature  Publishing Group
896| NOVEMBER 2003 |VOLUME 4  www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbioPERSPECTIVES
6. Crowfoot, D. X-ray crystallography and sterol structure.
Vitam. Horm. 2, 409–461 (1944).
7. Hodgkin, D. C. The X-ray analysis of the structure of
pencillin. Adv. Sci. 6, 85–89 (1949).
8. Abrahamsson, S., Hodgkin, D. C. & Maslen, E. N. The
crystal structure of phenoxymethyl penicillin. Biochem. J.
86, 514–535 (1963).
9. Crowfoot, D., Bunn, C. W., Roger-Low, B. M. & 
Turner-Jones, A. in The Chemistry of Pencillins 310–367
(Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 1949).
10. Hodgkin, D., Porter, M. W. & Spiller, R. C.
Crystallographic measurement on the anti-pernicious
anaemia factor. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B126 , 609–613
(1950).
11. Hodgkin, D. C. The structure of the corrin nucleus from
X-ray analysis. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A288 , 294–305
(1965).
12. Carlisle, C. H. & Crowfoot, D. The crystal structure of
cholesteryl iodide. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A184 , 64–83
(1945).
13. Hodgkin, D. C. et al. The structure of vitamin B12: (I) an
outline of the crystallographic investigation of vitamin B12.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A242 , 228–263 (1957).
14. Brink, C. et al. X-ray crystallographic evidence of the
structure of vitamin B12. Nature 174, 1169–1171 (1954).
15. Hodgkin, D. C. et al. The crystal structure of the
hexacarboxylic acid derived from vitamin B12and the
molecular structure of the vitamin. Nature 176, 325–328
(1955).
16. Hodgkin, D. C. et al. The structure of vitamin B12: (II) the
crystal structure of hexacarboxylic acid obtained by the
degradation of vitamin B12. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A251 ,
306–352 (1959).
17. Crowfoot, D. & Dunitz, J. D. The structure of calciferol.
Nature 162, 608–609 (1948).
18. Hodgkin, D. C., Rimmer, B. M., Dunitz, J. D. & 
Trueblood, K. N. The crystal structure of a calciferol
derivative. J. Chem. Soc. 4945–4956 (1963). 
19. Trueblood, K. N. in Structural Studies on Molecules of
Biological Interest (eds Dodson, G. G., Glusker, J. &
Sayre, D.) 87–105 (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1981).
20. Eschenmoser, A. J. Studies on the synthesis of corrins.
Pure Appl. Chem. 7, 297–315 (1963).
21. Crowfoot, D. X-ray single crystal photographs of insulin.
Nature 135, 591–592 (1935).
22. Schlichtkrull, J. Insulin crystals I: the minimum mole-
fraction of metal in insulin crystals prepared with Zn2+;
Cd2+; Co2+; Ni2+; Cu2+; Mn2+; Fe2+. Acta. Chem. Scand.
10, 1455 (1956). 
23. Crowfoot, D. & Riley, D. X-ray measurements on wet
insulin crystals. Nature 144, 1011–1012 (1939).
24. Crowfoot, D. & Riley, D. An X-ray study of Palmer’s
lactoglobulin. Nature 141, 521–522 (1938).
25. Dodson, E., Harding, M. M., Hodgkin, D. C. & Rossman,
M. G. The crystal structure of insulin III. Evidence for a 
2-fold axis in rhombohedral zinc insulin. J. Mol. Biol. 16,
227–241 (1966).
26. Adams, M. J. et. al. Structure of rhombohedral 2 zinc
insulin crystals. Nature 224, 491–495 (1969).
27. Dodson, G. Dorothy Mary Crowfoot Hodgkin, OM
1910–1994. Biog. Mem. Fell . R. Soc. 48, 179–219 (2002).
28. Baker, E. N. et al. The structure of 2Zn pig insulin crystals
of 1.5Å resolution. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B B319 ,
369–456 (1988).
29. Hodgkin, D. C. The X-ray analysis of complicated
molecules: Nobel lecture. Les Prix Nobel 157–178 (1965). 
30. Hodgkin, D. C. Chinese work on insulin. 
Nature 255, 103 (1975).
31. Schlichtkrull, J. Insulin Crystals (Munksgaard,
Copenhagen, 1958).
32. Hodgkin, D. C. Insulin, its chemistry and biochemistry.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B A338 , 251–275 (1974).
33. Kendrew, J. C. Myoglobin and the structure of proteins.
Science 139, 1259–1266 (1963).
34. Perutz, M. F. et al. Structure of haemoglobin: a three
dimensional Fourier synthesis at 5.5 Å resolution,
obtained by X-ray analysis. Nature 185, 416–422 (1960).
Online links
DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Swiss-Prot: http://us.expasy.org/sprot/
myoglobin | pepsin
FURTHER INFORMATION
Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin – Nobel Lecture: http://www.nobel.
se/chemistry/laureates/1964/hodgkin-lecture.html
Access to this interactive links box is free online.intractable and that remained with her for
many years (such as the vitamin-B12 and
insulin challenges). But, with her incredible
skill and imagination, she would piece together
the chemical jigsaw, despite the fact that others
might see virtually nothing interpretable in the
same Fourier maps. Dorothy believed firmly in
the significance of the strangest and smallest
‘bumps’ of electron density in these maps and
her encyclopaedic knowledge of chemistry was
an enormous strength behind her innate flair
for their interpretation.
Dorothy belongs to a small group of
women who have changed the face of science
(for further information about her interna-
tional relationships and her time as President
of both Pugwash and the IUCr, see BOXES 1,2 ).
In a time when there were no computers and
modern diffractometers, her selected goals in
structural chemistry (cholesterol, penicillin,
vitamin B12 and insulin) must have seemed
impossible to attain. However, once she had
solved these structures using X-ray crystallog-
raphy, they revealed the complexities of
nature in a beautiful and complete way and
this effectively freed chemists from the bur-
den of structure determination. This liberated
them to follow new synthetic strategies and
not to have to design, among other things,
methods for the stepwise proof of chemical
structure. It is therefore entirely appropriate
that Dorothy was awarded the Nobel Prize for
Chemistry in 1964 (FIG. 1) for her pioneering
and inspired work on the structures of bio-
logically significant molecules using X-ray
diffraction techniques29.
Throughout the years, Dorothy’s personal
life also flourished. Dorothy Crowfoot mar-
ried Thomas Hodgkin in December 1937
and, amazingly, was required to resign her
Somerville College fellowship to do so
(although she was re-instated automatically
afterwards; for further information, see REF. 1 ).
They had three children (Luke, Elizabeth and
Toby), many grandchildren and even some
great grandchildren before she died in the
summer of 1994.
Chemistry Department, University of Durham,
Durham DH1 3LE, UK.
e-mail: j.a.k.howard@durham.ac.uk
doi:10.1038/nrm1243
1. Ferry, G. Dorothy Hodgkin: A Life (Granta Books,
London, 1998).
2. Powell, H. M. & Crowfoot, D. M. Layer-chain structures of
thallium di-alkyl halides. Nature 130, 131–132 (1932).
3. Crowfoot, D. & Bernal, J. D. X-ray crystallographic
measurements on some derivatives of cardiac
aglucones. Chem. Ind. 953–956 (1934).
4. Bernal, J. D. & Crowfoot, D. X-ray photographs of
crystalline pepsin. Nature 133, 794–795 (1934).
5. Dodson, G. G., Glusker, J. P ., Ramaseshan, S. &
Venkatesan, K. (eds) The Collected Works of Dorothy
Crowfoot Hodgkin Vols 1–3 (Indian Academy of
Sciences, Bangalore, 1994).The work Dorothy began in 1934 was to
last 35 years and the structure of insulin26was
finally announced at the IUCr in Stony
Brook, USA, in 1969. It was truly a mammoth
task and a remarkable achievement by
Dorothy and the many researchers who had
worked with her over the intervening years
(for example, Marjorie Harding, Margaret
Adams, Neil Isaacs, T ed Baker, Guy Dodson,
Tom Blundell, Eleanor Dodson, M. Vijayan
and many others mentioned in REF. 5 ). Each
one put one or more pieces into the huge jig-
saw puzzle that was finally the full 3D struc-
ture of insulin. The 1969 paper that described
the crystal structure was the tenth publication
on insulin, but in the following 14 years, there
were 38 further publications that described its
biochemistry and biological behaviour, as
well as more structural details (for further
information, see REF. 27 ).
As predicted from the very early studies,
insulin was found to be a trimer of three well-
defined dimers, each held together in an
arrangement of β-pleated sheets by hydrogen
bonds (FIG. 4) .And, in 1998, Dorothy and col-
leagues determined for the first time the
structural differences in the two chemically
identical monomers that comprise the
dimer28.The crystal structure of insulin was,
of course, just the beginning for understand-
ing how the beautiful and complex structure
of this hormone relates to its cellular func-
tions. Nonetheless, it led to an understanding
of the behaviour of the hormone in solution,
the basis of its chemical reactions, a rational-
ization of its folding properties and the
dependence of these properties on disul-
phide-bond formation (the existence of
which had been suggested earlier by Sanger).
An understanding of the self-assembly of the
monomers to dimers and then to hexamers
also evolved from a full knowledge of the
structure (FIG. 4) .The surfaces that were
involved in the  biosynthesis of the hormone
could be identified, and a framework was cre-
ated for studying receptor binding. The
knowledge of the 3D structure was also cru-
cial for developing a reliable way to synthesize
insulin for medical use in the treatment of
diabetes, and the preparation of genetically
modified, monomeric insulin has since
improved diabetes therapy considerably.
A true pioneer
Dorothy Hodgkin had an ability to sense the
most significant problems in structural chem-
istry, and these were always the most difficult
ones that seemed virtually impossible to solve
at the time. She had tremendous tenacity, per-
severance and optimism, even when she was
working with problems that seemed
© 2003        Nature  Publishing Group
