Prorein Science (1994). 3:2465-2469. Cambridge  University  Press.  Printed in the USA. 
Copyright 0 1994 The  Protein Society 
Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin (1910-1994) 
Within  this world there  are great  scientists whose passing leaves 
the  world  saddened,  but  who gave so much  to  make  the  world 
a  richer  place. One of  these, Dorothy  Hodgkin, passed away on 
July 29, 1994. She  was a dedicated scientist and a friend  to all 
who knew her.  In 1964 she  won  the  Nobel  Prize,  unshared, in 
chemistry  “for  her  determination by X-ray techniques  of  the 
structures  of biologically important molecules.” These  include 
the  structures  of  cholesteryl  iodide (which showed  the  skeleton 
of steroids),  the  chemical  formulae  of penicillin, vitamin BI2, 
and  vitamin  B12  coenzyme,  and,  later,  the  three-dimensional 
structure  of  the  protein  hormone  insulin.  She  had  the  courage, 
skill, and sheer willpower to extend the method of X-ray diffrac- 
tion analyses of crystals to compounds  that were far  more  com- 
plex than  anything  attempted before. Jack  Dunitz,  who worked 
in  her laboratory  for several years, wrote: “Dorothy  had  an  un- 
erring instinct for sensing the  most  significant  structural  prob- 
lems in this field, she  had  the  audacity  to  attack these problems 
when they  seemed well-nigh insoluble, she  had  the perseverance 
to struggle  onward  where  others  would  have given up,  and  she 
had  the skill and  imagination to solve  these problems  once  the 
pieces of  the  puzzle  began  to  take  shape. It is for  these  reasons 
that Dorothy’s contribution  has been so special” (Dunitz, 1981). 
Dorothy was born  Dorothy Mary Crowfoot  on May 12,  1910, 
in Cairo,  Egypt.  Her  father,  John  Winter  Crowfoot, was an  ar- 
chaeologist and historian in the Egyptian  Ministry  of Education 
and subsequently the Principal of  Gordon College at  Khartoum 
and  Director  of  Education  and  Antiquities in Sudan.  Later  he 
worked  at  the British School  of  Archaeology in Jerusalem.  Her 
mother,  Grace  May  (Molly) (nCe Hood),  was  an  expert  on  the 
history of ancient textiles, and  wrote a book  on  the  flowering 
plants  of  Sudan.  Dorothy,  the eldest daughter,  had  three sisters 
with whom  she  remained close during  her  entire life. She lived 
with her family  in Sudan  for a time,  but  during  the first  World 
War,  because  of  the  fear  of  attacks  on British colonies,  Doro- 
thy  and  her sisters  were sent back to  England.  There  she lived 
with her grandmother  and  attended a  small  private  school. This 
experience, she believed, was the origin of her independent  spirit. 
In 1918, as  soon  as  the war was over, Dorothy’s mother returned 
to  England.  Thereafter,  both  parents  spent  each  summer in En- 
gland,  and  the rest of the  year in Sudan.  Dorothy  attended  to 
a coeducational  school,  the  Sir  John  Leman  School, in Beccles, 
Suffolk,  and her interest in science started early. She was encour- 
aged by a  family friend,  Dr. A.F. Joseph  (“Uncle  Joseph”), a 
soil  chemist at  the  Cairo  branch  of  the Wellcome Laboratory. 
When Dorothy left Sudan, Dr. Joseph gave her  a portable chem- 
ical laboratory  complete with apparatus  for mineralogical anal- 
yses. The  archaeological  studies of her  parents  also interested 
Dorothy.  Just  before going to college, Dorothy assisted her par- 
ents,  who were living in Jerusalem, with excavations  at  Jerash 
in Transjordan.  She was particularly  intrigued by the elegant Dorothy  Crowfoot  Hodgkin in 1970 when she  came to the Fox Chase 
Cancer  Center to describe  the newly determined  crystal  structure of 
insulin in the  first  Patterson  Memorial  Lecture  entitled,  “X-ray  analy- 
sis and  the  structure of insulin.” 
geometric  patterns of the  mosaic  pavements  that were found 
(McGrayne, 1993). 
Dorothy  obtained  her  undergraduate  education in chemistry 
at Somerville College, Oxford,  obtaining a Science Prize in 1930. 
Her X-ray  crystallographic research career  started with her stud- 
ies of thallium  dialkyl halides  with H.M.  (“Tiny”)  Powell, a 
demonstrator  under  H.L.  Bowman,  the  professor  of  mineral- 
ogy and crystallography.  This  comprised the research part of her 
undergraduate  degree  (Powell & Crowfoot, 1932). She  gradu- 
ated  from college with a B.A. degree with first-class honors  and 
a B.Sc. degree. Then it was necessary for her to look for a po- 
sition  and  “Uncle  Joseph”  introduced her to T. Martin Lowry, 
who  advised  her to work with John  Desmond  (JD) Bernal (af- 
fectionately called  “Sage”). She  took his advice  and  obtained a 
Ph.D.  at  Cambridge University  in 1937, working with  Bernal 
from 1932 to 1936. Her  work  there, in that very exciting labo- 
ratory,  reinforced her  lifelong interest in structural biochemis- 
try. Somerville College was, however, eager for Dorothy to come 
back to Oxford.  They  awarded  her a Vernon Harcourt  Schol- 
arship in 1932 and a  Research  Fellowship from 1933 to 1935, 
even though she was attached to Newnham College, Cambridge. 
During  her  years in  Bernal’s laboratory  Dorothy  took  many 
X-ray diffraction  photographs. In 1934, Bernal and  Dorothy 
2465 
Obituary: Dorothy  Crowfoot Hodgkin 
first  reported on  the  diffraction  pattern of a crystalline protein, 
pepsin,  pointing out  that in order  to  obtain  good  diffraction  pat- 
terns,  the  crystals of proteins  should  not  be  dried,  but  should 
be  studied  surrounded  by  their  mother  liquor  (Bernal & Crow- 
foot, 1934). Air-dried  protein  crystals  gave very poor, if any, 
diffraction  patterns, while those  crystals  that were kept in their 
mother  liquor gave nice diffraction  spots  on  photographic film. 
In  fact,  Dorothy was not  in  the  laboratory on the  day  that  the 
first  X-ray diffraction  photographs  of a protein were obtained, 
because  her  parents  had  taken  her to  London  to see a specialist 
about  some  health  problems which  were the beginning of  rheu- 
matoid  arthritis.  She subsequently took  many X-ray diffraction 
photographs  of  proteins,  and,  in  October 1934, obtained  X-ray 
diffraction  photographs of  crystals of insulin (Crowfoot, 1935). 
Even  though  Dorothy  corresponded with  A. Lindo  Patterson 
on his vector map  method of  analysis, the  methods  for interpret- 
ing  these diffraction  photographs  could  not,  at  that  time, lead 
to a protein  structure  determination.  In  retrospect,  she  wrote of 
the  Patterson  maps  of  insulin  that  she  had  calculated:  “These 
old  patterns ... do correspond  rather well to  the  pattern  you get 
just  from  the  main  chain  distribution  in  insulin,  in  spite of the 
complexity of the  pattern”  (Hodgkin, 1987). 
While working  in Bernal’s laboratory  Dorothy  also  became 
interested in steroids and their  structures. Bernal had shown that 
X-ray  diffraction  photographs were not  compatible with the 
then-accepted  Windaus-Wieland  formula  because  the  latter 
could  not be fit  into  the  unit cell in the  orientation  indicated by 
the refractive  index measurements (Bernal, 1932). Bernal’s pub- 
lished note  on  the  subject led to a  revision of the  chemical  for- 
mulae of steroids. Dorothy, with  Bernal and Isidor Fankuchen, 
studied crystals of over  one  hundred  steroids  and  reported their 
unit-cell dimensions,  refractive  indices,  and  probable  packing 
and hydrogen bonding  (head-to-head or head-to-tail, for exam- 
ple) in  a monumental  study  (Bernal et al., 1940). 
It was then necessary for  Dorothy  to begin her own scientific 
career.  In 1936, she  became a Tutor  and Fellow  of Somerville 
College. She missed the  camaraderie of  Bernal’s laboratory, 
however,  and went back  often  during these early years. Oxford 
provided  her  with a scientific and  intellectual  environment  free 
from most  of the usual burden of administrative  formalities, and 
she was given much moral  support by the principal of Somerville 
College, hematologist Janet Vaughan. Dorothy was made a Uni- 
versity Lecturer  and  Demonstrator in 1946, but  did  not  become 
a University Reader  until 1955. As was the  Oxford  tradition, she 
made  students  work  hard  and  did  not  spoon-feed  them.  Somer- 
ville College  admitted  only  women,  but  its  students  did  labora- 
tory  work,  attended lectures, and  took  examinations with  all the 
other  students, men and  women, in various disciplines of  study. 
The system at  Oxford in the 1950s allowed women  tutors  to  ob- 
tain Oxford University positions as lecturers and  demonstrators, 
in addition to their  appointments in the  individual colleges. 
There  were,  at  that  time, 23 men’s colleges and 5 women’s col- 
leges (most  are  now  coeducational).  Dorothy  had  students  who 
were doing  Part 11s (the  fourth-year  practical  research  part of 
the chemistry degree) and students who were doing D.Phils. One 
of  her  Part I1 students was Margaret  Roberts,  later  Margaret 
Thatcher,  Prime Minister of  Great  Britain  and  the  only British 
Prime  Minister with a degree in  science. 
Dorothy’s  laboratory  in  Oxford was  in the  Ruskin Science 
Museum,  an  old  gothic  building.  The  room  where  she  worked 
was the  room in  which Thomas  Henry  Huxley successfully de- bated  Bishop  Samuel  Wilberforce on  the  subject  of  evolution 
in  an  historic  debate  on  June 30, 1860, at a meeting of  the Brit- 
ish Association for  the Advancement  of Science. The  laboratory 
itself also had gothic  qualities. Housed in a tiny gallery, the crys- 
tal  mounting  equipment  and polarizing microscope were reach- 
able  only by ladder-like  steps.  Using  the  steps  was  hard  for 
Dorothy,  who was having  trouble with arthritis,  but  she never 
lost a  crystal while climbing up or down. Very soon she had  two 
graduate  students,  both of them, by chance, male. Her  first 
graduate  student was  Dennis  Riley, who  joined her  in 1937. He 
was excited by a lecture  she  gave on steroids  and  wrote:  “Here 
was I, a member  of a prestigious college, choosing to  do my 
fourth year’s research  in a new borderline  subject with a young 
female  who held no university appointment  but  only a Fellow- 
ship in a women’s college”  (Riley, 1981). Riley worked on pre- 
paring  protein  crystals  and  attempting to obtain  diffraction 
patterns  for  lactoglobin,  insulin,  and several other  proteins 
(Crowfoot & Riley, 1939). 
During  World War I1 Dorothy was joined by Bernal’s collab- 
orators,  C.H. Carlisle and  Dr.  Kathe Dornberger-Schiff. Harry 
Carlisle  was Dorothy’s second  graduate  student  and  she  inter- 
ested  him  in the  structure of steroids,  another result  of her work 
with Bernal.  She  now  aimed  to  determine  the  molecular  struc- 
ture of cholesteryl  iodide by locating  each  atom in the  crystal 
structure. A crystallographic  investigation  of  cholesteryl  bro- 
mide and  chloride  had  formed  part  of  her  Ph.D. thesis at  Cam- 
bridge,  but no molecular  structure  had yet come  out of that 
work.  Dorothy  pioneered  the  use  of  Patterson  maps in the  de- 
termination of the  structure  of cholesteryl iodide,  as  she was al- 
ways on  the  lookout  for new and better ways to solve structures. 
The  iodine  positions were found  from  the  Patterson  map,  and 
electron-density  maps  phased on these positions were then cal- 
culated.  Dorothy  had an uncanny ability to pick out a  molecule 
from  an electron-density map  that  contained symmetry-related 
artifacts,  such  as were present  in  maps  of  the  crystal  structure 
of cholesteryl iodide, and later, penicillin. Cholesteryl iodide was 
one  of  the first analyses based on three-dimensional  calculations, 
and it established  the relative stereochemistry  at  each  carbon 
atom of the steroids (Carlisle & Crowfoot, 1945). This result was 
verified by other  subsequent crystallographic  studies  of steroids 
(Crowfoot & Dunitz, 1948). Dorothy never published a  result 
until  she was sure it was right. 
Dorothy  had  many  other  graduate  students,  including  Bar- 
bara  Rogers  Low,  Pauline  Cowan  Harrison,  Monica  Curzon 
Webster, Jenny  Pickworth  Glusker, Ted  Maslen, Jennifer  Kam- 
per, David Dale,  Roger  Diamand,  Carol  Saunderson  Huber, 
Anthony  Cooper,  Michael  James,  Frank  Moore,  C.E.  Nock- 
olds, Sofia Candeloro  de Sanctis,  Eric Edmond,  H.R.  Harrison, 
S.M.  Cutfield,  David  Sayre,  Marjorie M. Harding,  Margaret 
Adams,  and  Judith  Howard.  Eleanor  Dodson,  who  came  from 
Australia, said of Dorothy’s laboratory: “I loved the  internation- 
alness of it, feeling part  of a world  community. We all felt  that 
we were equals - it  was just  that  Dorothy knew more”  (Ferry, 
1994). 
Dorothy’s next big venture was the determination of  the chem- 
ical formula of  penicillin. This  antibiotic  changed  the  course of 
the  management of human  infectious diseases.  Penicillin  was 
discovered  in a mold by Alexander  Fleming  at  St. Mary’s Hos- 
pital,  London,  in 1929. Then,  at  Oxford,  Howard Florey and 
Ernest  Chain proceeded to isolate  the  antibiotic  from  the  mold. 
World  War 11, with  its many  casualties, was  in  progress and  the 
Obituary: Dorothy  Crowfoot Hodgkin 2467 
determination  of the chemical formula of penicillin was vital. 
Chemists were working hard on  the problem. Dorothy obtained 
crystals of penicillamine hydrochloride in the summer of 1942, 
and she and Barbara Rogers-Low studied crystals of several de- 
rivatives using the very antiquated  equipment of Dorothy’s lab- 
oratory.  The correct determination of the molecular formula 
came from X-ray analyses of the sodium,  potassium, and ru- 
bidium derivatives of benzylpenicillin  by  use  of isomorphous re- 
placement, optical  analogues, and difference maps.  This work 
was jointly reported by Dorothy and Barbara Rogers-Low from 
Oxford,  and by Annette  Turner-Jones  and Charles Bunn from 
Imperial Chemical Industries  (Crowfoot et al., 1949). They 
found that  the formula contained a four-membered ring  of three 
carbon  atoms  and  one nitrogen atom. This was the 0-lactam 
structure with which Sir Robert Robinson,  the organic chemis- 
try  professor at  Oxford  at  that time, disagreed because such 
chemical  rings are generally unstable while  penicillin  seemed  rea- 
sonably stable. John  Cornforth, another  organic chemist, is re- 
ported  to  have  threatened  to give up chemistry and grow 
mushrooms if the chemical formula was shown to contain  a 
0-lactam ring. Dorothy did, indeed, determine the correct for- 
mula, but, fortunately for science, Cornforth did not keep his 
promise. This chemical formula served as the  starting  point for 
many chemical modifications that have been successfully used 
as antibiotics, such as the cephalosporins and thiostrepton for 
which Dorothy also later determined the crystal structures (Hodg- 
kin & Maslen, 1961; Anderson et al., 1970). 
Another chemical formula  that  Dorothy determined was that 
of the anti-pernicious  anemia  factor vitamin BIZ. Pernicious 
anemia, a fatal disease, was found by Minot and Murphy in 1926 
to be treatable by liver extracts, and, in 1948, the active factor 
was isolated from liver  in crystalline form as beautiful, deep red 
crystals. E. Lester Smith brought these crystals from Glaxo Lab- 
oratories to Oxford so that Mary Porter and R.C. Spiller could 
study  them and determine from their unit-cell dimensions and 
refractive indices if they were the same as those isolated by Karl 
Folkers at Merck Laboratories  (Hodgkin et al., 1950). Dorothy 
was excited at  the crystals’ appearance and immediately mea- 
sured their unit-cell dimensions and molecular weight. The  sub- 
sequent crystal structure of the vitamin and several analogues 
took many years. It was achieved by use of heavy-atom meth- 
ods  and  the detailed  examination of many three-dimensional 
electron-density maps (that Dorothy was so good at). The pos- 
sibility  of studying so many three-dimensional maps came about 
because Ken Trueblood of UCLA  approached  Dorothy at a 
meeting and asked if she had diffraction data  on any large crys- 
tal structures that he could use to test his computer  programs. 
The programs  he had written were for one of the largest com- 
puters of that time. Refinements of electron-density maps were 
done by an exchange of new maps and new atomic parameters 
between Oxford  and  UCLA. Dick Prosen and Bob Sparks as- 
sisted with the  computational aspects. This collaboration boosted 
three-dimensional studies of crystal structures over the  the less 
satisfactory two-dimensional studies that were common at  the 
time due  to computer  limitations. 
The  structure  obtained  for vitamin BIZ was that of  a 
porphyrin-like ring with one bridging carbon  atom missing so 
that two pyrrole rings were directly linked, and with each of the 
@-positions  of these rings fully saturated (Brink et al., 1954; 
Hodgkin et al., 1955). Later Galen Lenhert showed  in Dorothy’s 
laboratory  that  the coenzyme contains  a  cobalt-carbon bond, making it the first known naturally  occurring biologically sig- 
nificant organometallic compound (Lenhert & Hodgkin, 1961). 
The early work on vitamin BIZ was done with June Broomhead 
Lindsey, Clara Brink Shoemaker,  Jennifer Harrison Kamper, 
Ken Trueblood, John  H. Robertson, Maureen Mackay, myself, 
John White at Princeton University, and many others. Crystals 
of  a hexacarboxylic acid degradation  product served to define 
precisely the atomic arrangement in that part of the vitamin that 
had eluded chemical identification.  The crystals were grown by 
Jack Cannon in Alexander Todd’s laboratory in Cambridge. 
W.L. Bragg, in Fifty years of X-ray diffraction (Bragg, 1962), 
described the  BIZ  structure  determination  as  “breaking  the 
sound  barrier,” meaning that it  led to new horizons in the field. 
This refers to  the possibility of using heavy atoms  as a means 
of determining the structures of biological macromolecules as 
suggested by J. Monteath Robertson (1939). Dorothy used the 
cobalt atom  to phase the electron-density maps of the hexacar- 
boxylic acid, even though everyone  advised  her that it would not 
work because the scattering power of the cobalt atom was too 
weak  with  respect to the rest  of the molecule. Later vitamin BI2 
was synthesized by Robert B. Woodward and Albert Eschen- 
moser, thereby confirming the X-ray crystallographic result. 
Since Dorothy’s method worked so well, people were then en- 
couraged to tackle the crystal structures of proteins. 
Dorothy  took the first X-ray diffraction  photographs of in- 
sulin in 1935 and, from that time, until 34 years later when the 
crystal structure was solved, she was confident that  the molec- 
ular structure  could be determined from  the X-ray diffraction 
pattern. The sequence of amino acids in insulin, the first pro- 
tein to be sequenced, was known from the work  of Fred Sanger. 
In 1969, the  structure of rhombohedral 2Zn insulin at 2.8 A res- 
olution was reported  from Dorothy’s laboratory. This showed 
the insulin hexamer as a trimer of dimers, and provided an 
atomic model of the protein. In China, Chinese crystallogra- 
phers, led  by Tang You Chi, also worked on the crystal struc- 
ture of insulin. Dorothy and You Chi  had met in California in 
1947, and again, in China, in 1959, when Dorothy traveled there 
to compare and note differences (which  mainly  involved the side 
chains) between the electron-density maps of the two structure 
determinations. She also made a  point of bringing the state of 
science in China to  the attention of those in the West, since the 
Chinese at  that time had no efficient way to communicate their 
scientific results throughout the world. In the insulin work Dor- 
othy was assisted by Margaret Adams,  Marjorie  Harding, Ann 
Kennedy, Eleanor Dodson, Pauline Cowan Harrison, Guy Dod- 
son, Siv Ramaseshan,  Tom Blundell, M.  Vijayan, Ted Baker, 
Beryl Oughton Rimmer,  Dan  Mercola, and many others  (Dod- 
son et al., 1966; Adam et al., 1969; Bentley  et al., 1976). 
Dorothy was made  a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1947 
(when she was only 37), and received an endowed professorship, 
the Wolfson Research Professorship of the Royal Society in 
1960. She held this post until her retirement in 1977. She was 
then made fellow  of  Wolfson College, Oxford, 1977-1982. Dor- 
othy received the Royal Medal of the Royal Society  in 1957 and 
the Copley Medal in 1976. She won the Nobel Prize in Chemis- 
try in 1964, the third  woman to receive this prestigious award 
in the field of chemistry, following Marie Curie (191  1) and Irene 
Joliot-Curie (1935), and  the only British woman to  do so. Dor- 
othy served as President of the  International  Union of Crystal- 
lography, 1972-1975, and as President of the British Association 
for  the Advancement of Science, 1977-1978. She received the 
2468 Obituary: Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin 
Order of Merit, the highest civilian honor in Great  Britain, in 
1965. She was the second woman to receive it, the other being 
Florence Nightingale in 1907. She was relieved that it was not 
the title of “Dame” which she said she would not have liked 
(Perutz, 1981). Dorothy  had honorary degrees from  many  uni- 
versities. She was Chancellor of Bristol University from 1970 
through 1988, where, unlike most other Chancellors,  she  made 
a  point of meeting students and talking to  them.  It is reported 
that, while  giving  her address at the University she told the grad- 
uates of the importance of education and research in this  mod- 
ern  world, and then gave the advice to “live modestly and  do 
serious things”  (Dodson, 1994). 
In 1937, Dorothy  married Thomas Lionel Hodgkin, a tutor 
in adult education and later an historian of Africa. Thomas was 
Director of Extramural Studies in Oxford and was a Fellow of 
Balliol College. They had three children - Luke (1938), Eliza- 
beth (Liz) (1941), and Toby (1946)-and both were loving and 
dedicated parents who took pains to let each child develop his 
or her particular talent. Thomas was a generous, interesting, and 
gregarious  companion. Their home always had interesting vis- 
itors who gathered around  the table for a meal cooked to per- 
fection by Thomas.  He did a  lot of writing at home and helped 
looked after  the children.  Two  neighbors,  Edith and Alice, 
helped maintain the house when the children were young. Dor- 
othy’s sister, Joan, together with  her  five young children, joined 
the  Hodgkin household. This home was always warm, inviting, 
chaotic, and interesting with Hodgkin  children, relatives’ chil- 
dren,  and visiting children all over the place, as well as visitors 
from all over the world. Dorothy and  Thomas had many grand- 
children and great grandchildren. Sadly, Thomas died  in  Greece 
in 1982. 
Like Thomas, Dorothy was interested in the social climate of 
the time and  both worked hard  to achieve her vision of social- 
istic paradise.  This  endeavor  started for  her, she once  told me, 
as a result of her childhood experiences in the Girl Guides 
(Scouts). As a result she had many friends in the Soviet Union, 
China and Vietnam. Tom Blundell noted that “Dorothy saw  pol- 
itics as individual personalities, in terms of the people, not in 
terms of dogma or political convictions the way most people do” 
(McGrayne, 1993). In 1982 she was awarded the Mikhail Lo- 
monosov Medal of the Soviet Academy of  Sciences and in 1987 
she was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize,  partly, no  doubt, be- 
cause of her work to ease tensions between the East and West 
in the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs.  The 
Pugwash organization, which is a  fraternity of scientists inter- 
ested  in nuclear disarmament and improvements to life on  earth, 
meets annually to discuss solutions to disarmament and  the re- 
duction of international tension. Dorothy was  elected President 
in 1975. Her main service  in these political activities  was to keep 
open the possibility of a scientific dialogue between the coun- 
tries that  had such problems. Dorothy  also had a  great interest 
in African affairs, spurred by her upbringing and by her hus- 
band who traveled there  often.  In 1950 Kwame Nkrumah, the 
prime minister of Ghana, invited Thomas  Hodgkin to establish 
an Institute for African Studies and to help change Ghana’s  Uni- 
versity  College into  a full-fledged university. Dorothy spent sev- 
eral months each year with her husband in Africa, and she was 
with him in Accra, Ghana, when she received the news that she 
had won the Nobel Prize. 
Dorothy retired in 1977 but continued her interest in science 
to  the  end. In the summer of 1993, aided by her daughter Liz and a grant  from  the Royal Society, she traveled to Beijing to 
attend  the meeting of the International  Union of Crystallogra- 
phy and  to meet her Chinese friends. It was a  joyous  reunion 
and she made  a  point of listening to  the plenary lectures partic- 
ularly those on macromolecular structure. Her daughter Liz, as 
well as her other  children, and her friends  Jackie  Hodgkinson, 
Judith Howard,  and  Eleanor  Dodson, cared for her and visited 
her devotedly in the last years of her life when she was incapac- 
itated. She died peacefully at home, surrounded by family and 
friends, on July 29, 1994 at  Crab Mill, Ilmington, near Shipston- 
on-Stour, Warwickshire, England, in the old family home that 
had originally been a row of cottages and which retained the 
charm and friendliness of the Cotswolds. 
Dorothy  had the qualities of patience and optimism. She was 
physically slight and was increasingly frail in later years, bowed 
down with arthritis,  although she refused to let this prevent her 
from working. Her arthritic hands have  been portrayed by many 
famous  artists, including Henry Moore.  She was  very generous 
with any scientific information she had available, and scientists 
such as Max Perutz did not hesitate to approach her for advice 
(Perutz, 1981). A quotation  from  the introduction to a volume 
in her honor, published in 1981, may help to give a picture of 
this remarkable lady: “In a world in which science is often per- 
formed in large impersonal  groups,  Dorothy has shown that 
absolutely first-class science  may  still  be joined with a loving at- 
tention to individual values” (Dodson et al., 1981). 
I first met Dorothy when, as an undergraduate,  I  applied to 
Oxford to study chemistry. I  had promised my father I would 
go  to medical school if I did not get into  Oxford. Dorothy was 
concerned because 1 was young,  but  fortunately for me she ac- 
cepted me and I was able to study chemistry as I had hoped. 
Through the years we became good  friends and I enjoyed do- 
ing graduate work in her laboratory  after a Part I1 research 
project in infrared spectroscopy. She  taught me chemistry. She 
taught me  by her example of never despairing or complaining 
even though she was profoundly crippled by arthritis. She taught 
me how she could manage a research program with low fund- 
ing. She taught me to further  the cause of  women  in science. At 
that time women lost fellowships and research grants if they 
married because the funding agency claimed they were  now  liv- 
ing “at home.” Dorothy petitioned for each person to whom this 
happened, pointing out that two graduate students could not live 
on the stipend for one.  This  had to be done on a case-by-case 
basis, but she  persevered. Margaret Adams wrote of  her that she 
hummed in order to help her students cope with the  frustration 
of science. But, Margaret  added: “The nicest time I remember 
her humming was  when I suddenly realized that what was  be- 
ing hummed was ‘Through  the night of doubt  and sorrow’- 
that was actually quite supportive!” (Ferry, 1994). 
If I were to paint a portrait of Dorothy 1 would not portray 
her crippled hands, even though she appreciated the compliment 
paid her by those that  did. I would paint  the great scientist be- 
neath the frail and disabled exterior. She was slight, blond, blue- 
eyed, and pretty, excited by science, careful and precise in her 
experimental work, astounded by the beauty of  the results of 
crystal-structure analyses, and thoughtful about the meaning of 
her results. She could be loving and gentle, yet stern, and cared 
deeply both for people and for the science that she advanced SO 
greatly. Everyone listened at a meeting whenever she  spoke up 
with her quiet but firm voice because they knew that what she 
had  to say was important. She had  an encyclopedic knowledge 
Obituary: Dorothy  Crowfoot Hodgkin 2469 
of her field, and the  contribution of her colleagues to it. But the 
most significant trait that  Dorothy  had was that she aimed for 
the highest peaks. She chose subjects of great importance which 
most scientists of the time felt were beyond the  current  state-of- 
the-art (Dodson et al., 1994). She had  the imagination to insist 
that the problem she chose could be solved,  even though she had 
to wait for many years for the answer. In fact Dorothy pioneered 
many of the methods of macromolecular structure  determina- 
tion that we now take for granted. 
References 
Adams  MJ, Blundell TL, Dodson EJ, Dodson GG, Vijayan M, Baker EN, 
Harding MM, Hodgkin D, Rimmer B, Sheat S. 1969. Structure of rhom- 
bohedral 2-zinc insulin crystals. Nature 2243491-495. 
Anderson B, Hodgkin DC, Viswamitra MA. 1970. Structure of thiostrep- 
ton. Nature 225:223-225. 
Bentley G, Dodson E, Dodson 0, Hodgkin D, Mercola D.  1976. Structure 
of insulin in 4-zinc insulin. Nature 261:166-168. 
Bernal JD. 1932. Carbon skeleton of the sterols. Chem Ind 51:466. 
Bernal JD, Crowfoot D.  1934. X-ray photographs of crystalline pepsin. Na- 
ture 133:794-795. 
Bernal JD,  Crowfoot D, Fankuchen I. 1940. X-ray crystallography and  the 
chemistry of the steroids. I. Trans R Soc A239:135-182. 
Bragg WL. 1962. The growing power of X-ray analysis. In: Ewald P. ed. 
Fifty  years of X-ray  diffraction. Utrecht:  Oosthoek. pp 120-135. 
Brink C,  Hodgkin  DC, Lindsey J, Pickworth  J, Robertson JH, White JG. 
1954. X-ray crystallographic evidence on  the  structure of vitamin BI2. 
Nature 174:1169-1170. 
Carlisle CH, Crowfoot D.  1945. The crystal structure of cholesteryl iodide. 
Proc R Soc A 184:64-83. 
Crowfoot D. 1935. X-ray single-crystal photographs of insulin. Nature 
132591-592. 
Crowfoot D, Bunn  CW,  Rogers-Low BW, Turner-Jones A. 1949. X-ray crys- 
tallographic investigation of the  structure of penicillin. In: Clarke HT, 
Johnson  JR, Robinson R, eds. Chemistry of penicillin. Princeton, New 
Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp 310-367. 
Crowfoot D, Dunitz JD. 1948. Structure of calciferol. Nature 162: 608-609. 
Crowfoot D,  Riley D. 1939. X-ray measurements on wet insulin crystals. Nu- 
lure 144:1011-1012. 
Dodson E, Harding MM, Hodgkin DC, Rossmann MG. 1966. The crystal 
structure of insulin. 111. Evidence for a 2-fold axis in rhombohedral zinc 
insulin. J Mol Biol 16:227-241. 
Dodson G. 1994. Obituary. The Guardian. August 1, 1994. Dodson G, Glusker JP, Ramaseshan S, Venkatesan K, eds. 1994. The col- 
lected  works of Dorothy  Crowfoot  Hodgkin. Bangalore: Indian Acad- 
emy of Sciences. 
Dodson G, Glusker JP, Sayre D, eds. 198 1. Structural studies on molecules 
of biological interest. A volume in honour of  Dorothy  Hodgkin. Oxford, 
UK: Clarendon Press. 
Dunitz JD. 1981. Organic chemistry, X-ray analysis, and Dorothy Hodgkin. 
in: Dodson G, Glusker JP, Sayre D, eds. Structuralstudies on molecules 
of biological interest. A volume in honour of Dorothy  Hodgkin. Oxford, 
UK: Clarendon Press. pp 47-59. 
Ferry G. 1994. The amazing Dorothy  Hodgkin. Oxford  Today 6(3):22-24. 
Glusker JP,  Patterson BK, Rossi M.  1987. Patterson and Pattersons.  Fifty 
years of the Patterson function. Oxford, UK: Oxford Science Publications. 
Hodgkin DC. 1987. Patterson and Pattersons. In: Glusker JP, Patterson BK, 
Rossi M, eds. Patterson and Pattersons. Fvty years of the Patterson func- 
tion. International Union of  Crystallography  Crystallographic  Sympo- 
sia. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. pp 167-192. 
Hodgkin DC, Maslen EN. 1961. The X-ray analysis of the structure of ceph- 
alosporin C. Biochem J 79:393-402. 
Hodgkin DC, Pickworth J, Robertson JH, Trueblood KN, Prosen RJ, White 
JG. 1955. The crystal structure of the hexacarboxylic acid derived from 
B12 and  the molecular structure  of  the vitamin. Nature 176:325-328. 
Hodgkin DC, Porter MW,  Spiller RC. 1950. Crystallographic measurements 
of the anti-pernicious anemia factor. Proc R Soc 8136:609-613. 
Lenhert PC, Hodgkin DC.  1961. Structure of the 5,6-dimethylbenzimidazoyl- 
cobamide coenzyme. Nature 192:937-938. 
McGrayne SB. 1993. Nobel Prize women in science. New York: Carol  Pub- 
lishing Group. 
Perutz M. 1981. Forty years’ friendship with Dorothy. In: Dodson G, Glusker 
JP, Sayre D, eds. Structuralstudies on molecules of biological interest. 
A volume in honour of Dorothy Hodgkin. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press. 
Powell HM,  Crowfoot DM. 1932. Layer-chain structures of thallium dial- 
kyl halides. Nature 130:131-132. 
Riley DP. 1981. Oxford:  The early years. In: Dodson 0, Glusker JP, Sayre 
D, eds. Structuralstudies on molecules of biological interest. A volume 
in honourofDorothyHodgkin. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press. pp 17-25. 
Robertson JM. 1939.  Vector maps  and heavy atoms in crystal analysis and 
the insulin structure. Nature (Lond) 143:75-76. pp 5-12. 
JENNY P. GLUSKER 
Institute for Cancer Research 
Fox Chase Cancer Center 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 191 11 
