© 1938 Nature Publishing GroupNo. 3568, MARCH 19, 1938 NATURE 521 
John Hunter as a Pioneer of Veterinary Science 
THE annual oration of the Royal College of 
Surgeons commemorating the life and work of 
John Hunter, was delivered at the Mansion House 
on February 28, by Sir Frederick Hobday, emeritus 
professor of surgery, and formerly principal and 
dean at the Royal Veterinary College. This made a 
departure from the usual tradition that a member of 
the medical profession delivers the address. 
Sir Frederick Hobday in his introduction remarked 
that he felt it appropriate that a member of the 
veterinary profession should be honoured by the 
invitation to deliver the oration, for John Hunter 
was one of the founders of the Royal Veterinary 
College in 1791. He is described as being "the life 
and soul of the undertaking", and with him were 
associated Sir John Banks, Sir George Baker, the 
Duke of Northumberland and certain members of 
the Odiham Agricultural Society, who collected the 
necessary funds, and they were instrumental in 
bringing to England Prof. Charles Vial St. Bel, of 
the Veterinary School at Lyons, to be the first 
principal of the London Veterinary College. The 
early and unexpected death of St. Bel caused much 
anxiety regarding the future of the College, and 
Hunter helped to tide over the emergency. 
Sir Frederick Hobday then proceeded to review 
John Hunter's contributions to veterinary science. 
One of the first operations performed by St. Bel in 
Great Britain was the removal of accessory feet 
that grew from the fetlocks of the two fore-legs of a 
horse, and it is stated that Hunter personally assisted 
(he was surgeon at St. George's Hospital) and gave 
St. Bel "some useful and friendly hints". John 
Hunter was a genuine lover of horses, and has left 
some excellent advice upon their management and 
on the proper way to shoe colts in order to correct 
defects in the manner in which they may use their 
fore-legs. His observations on what is termed 
'roaring' are of particular interest, and although he 
did not correctly recognize its cause (paralysis of the 
left laryngeal nerve), he clearly distinguished this 
condition from 'broken wind'. Hunter wrote, too, 
"upon the effects that medicines have upon horses", 
and was untiring in his studies of the anatomy and physiology of animals-from the mouse to the 
elephant-birds, reptiles, insects and fishes. The 
illustrations in his book entitled "Certain Parts of 
the Animal Economy" cannot be surpassed for clear­
ness and accuracy even with the aids that are now 
available. His chapter on the glands between tlie 
rectum and bladder, the vesiculae seminales, describes 
minutely the comparative anatomy and uses of these 
glands both in man and in numerous animals, and the 
alterations that ensue after an animal has been unsexed. 
The body temperature of animals was another 
subject to which John Hunter devoted considerable 
attention. He performed an experiment in which 
he froze the edge of the comb of a cockerel and re­
marks that "when I cut off a little bit it did not 
bleed nor did the animal show any signs of pain"­
pioneer work in the use of a freezing mixture as an 
anaesthetic. 
Hunter's writings on digestion bear witness to his 
keen powers of observation, for he concluded that 
something secreted in the coat of the stomach acts 
upon the food and assimilates this to the nature of 
the blood. He had learnt that it is not possible to 
make a horse vomit, and recognized the different 
actions that medicinal agents have upon different 
species of animals. In regard to the last-named, Sir 
Frederick remarked that this could have been only 
through direct observation. Thus, morphine is a 
narcotic for man and the dog tribe, but produces 
disastrous delirium in the horse and cat ; strychnine 
and mercurials are much more toxic for the cow and 
dog than for the horse. 
In the realm of surgery, John Hunter's classical 
experiment of grafting a cook's spur into its comb is 
well known-definite pioneer work of the various 
grafting operations that are performed to-day. He 
also made a series of observations on the reunion of 
divided tendons. 
In conclusion, Sir Frederick Hobday alluded to 
the importance to a country of its agriculture, its 
animals and arable products, and of comparative 
medicine in the fight against disease, for it is here 
that the m:3dical man and the veterinary surgeon 
meet on common ground. 
·Crystal Structures of the Proteins 
AN X-RAY STUDY OF PALMER'S LACTOGLOBULIN 
By Dr. Dorothy Crowfoot and Dennis Riley, Department 
of Mineralogy, Oxford 
THE crystallization of a lactoglobulin from the 
albumin fraction of cow's milk by Palmer in 19341 
was notable both for the size and stability of the 
protein crystals and for their occurrence in two 
different crystallographic modifications. The stable 
tabular· form occurs alone when salt solutions of the 
protein are dialysed at an initial pH of 5·8 followed 
by adjustment to a pH of 5·2 with dilute HOI, whilst 
direct dialysis at a pH of 5·2 against distilled water 
produces needles which may later recrystallize in 
the tabular form. We have been able to study the inter-relationship of these two varieties through the 
kindness of Dr. R. A. Kekwiok of the Lister 
Institute, who gave us preparations of them both. 
The X-ray measurements show that the two types 
of lactoglobulin crystals differ not only in crystal 
structure hut also probably in their water content. 
The tabular crystals are evidently, even on super­
ficial examination, heavily nydrated. They occur 
commonly either as plates {001} up to 0·3 mm. 
across and bounded by pyramid faces or as prisms 
elongated along [010] and showing (100) dominating. 
They prove to be orthorhombic but are very markedly 
pseudo-tetragonal, and appear isotropic when viewed 
along the c axis. The birefringence is negative, about 
0·004. When these crystals are removed from their 
© 1938 Nature Publishing Group522 NATURE MARCH 19, 1938, VoL. 141 
mother liquor they shrink visibly in the direction of 
the c axis, and the birefringence falls to less than 
0·001. This shrinkage is accurately determined by 
the X-ray measurements which were carried out both 
on the air-dried crystals and on crystals mounted in 
their mother liquor. For the wet crystals a = b = 
63·5 A., c = 145 A.; for the dry crystals a = b = 
59 A., c = 105 A. The space group in the case of the 
wet crystals is P212121, showing, in X-ray intensities 
as in dimensions, a close approach to the tettagonal 
space group P4221, whence there are probably 8 
molecules in the unit cell. There were too few X-ray 
reflections from the dry crystals to indicate the space 
group, but it seems most probable that this unit cell 
also contains eight molecules, but without water of 
crystallization. viously measured, pepsin and insulin, and with 
hmmoglobin and chymotrypsin (recorded below). 
The similarity in cell dimensions extends also to the 
types of photographs obtained from wet and dry 
crystals of lactoglobulin. The wet tabular crystals 
give very beautiful X-ray pictures with reflections 
covering the whole field and extending ont to spacings 
of less than 2 ·4 A. Those from the needle crystals 
are less good owing to their much smaller size. But 
with the dry crystals the photographs are very poor 
indeed, and this is evidently due to the poor orienta­
tion of the protein molecules in the collapsed structure. 
There are no X-ray reflections with spacings less 
than 20 A. The sharpness of the limit is reminiscent 
of that already observed on the much better X-ray 
photographs obtained from air-dried insulin', and 
Pepsin Hremoglobin Chymotrypsin Lactoglobulin Lactoglobulin Insulin Tobacco seed 
tabular needle globulin ---a 116 109 ! x99 63·5 63·5 
Wet b 67 63·2 67·8 63·5 63·5 
Layer-spacing 9 X 51·2 50·2 65 2 X 72·5 2 X 62·5 
Molecular volume (A.') 67,000 174,000 55,000 73,000 63,000 ---a 102 45 59 54 130 2 x61 
b 56 62·5 59 54 74·7 2 x61 Dry Layer-spacing 35 5:1·5 2 X 52·5 2 X 62·5 30·6 2x61 
Molecular volume (A.1) 101,000 38,000 46,000 46,000 50,000 455,000 
Shrinkage per cent 42 31 
The wet needle crystals occupy a place intermediate 
between the wet and dry tabular crystals. They 
appear to be exactly tetragonal, elongated along c. 
The cell dimensions are a= b = 63·5 A., c = 125 A., 
space group P4121• The fact that the needles show 
positive birefringence suggests that they differ from 
the tabular form in the orientation of the molecules 
as well as in water content, and this is confirmed by 
the drying phenomena. There is little apparent change 
in shape or birefringence on exposure of the needles 
to air, but the very weak X-ray diffraction effects 
obtained from the dried crystals indicate a new unit 
cell with approximately a = b =54 A., and c = 125A. 
The unit cell dimensions of the different lacto­
globulin crystals suggest that in each case there are 
eight protein molecules in the cell, associated with 
different quantities of water of crystallization. Some 
difficulty was experienced, however, in making 
measurements of the crystal density to check this, 
owing to the great solubility of the protein crystals 
in salt solutions. ·A value of 1·257 was obtained in 
sugar solutions for the density of the wet tabular 
crystals, and this may be regarded as an upper limit 
for the density (cj. Adair and Adair•). It is in agree­
ment with the presence of a considerable proportion 
of water in the crystals. It has so far proved 
impossible to measure the density of the needle 
crystals in any solvent, since even in sugar solutions 
the crystals rapidly imbibe liquid, with resultant 
swelling and loss of shape. The density of the dty 
tabular crystals in o-dichlorbenzene and toluene was 
found to be 1·27, which is lower than might be 
expected, probably owing to the occlusion of air in 
the irregular structure formed in the drying process. 
The molecular weight of the protein if calculated from 
this value and the cell dimensions given above is 
35,30(', or assuming the more probable density of 
1·31 (that of dried insulin) 36,500. These values are 
in agreement with that obtained by ultracentrifuge 
measurements-about 39,00()3, within the limits of 
experimental accuracy. 
It is of most interest to compare the crystal 
structure of these protein crystals with those pre-37 27 
suggests that in the insulin crystals also a certain 
degree of molecular disorientation prevails. As might 
be expected the crystal structure of dry insulin is 
of a very compact type, while in the wet lactoglobulin 
crystals, as in pepsin, the molecular arrangement 
must be loose and extended. 
MoLECULAR WEIGHT oF A ToBAcco SEED GLOBULIN 
By Dr. Dorothy Crowfoot, Dept. of Mineralogy, Oxford, 
and Dr. I. Fankuchen, Crystallographic Laboratory, 
Cambridge 
In order to determine the structure of protein 
crystals from X-ray diffraction effects it is usually 
necessary to measure fairly large single crystals. An 
exception to this rule is the case of crystals belonging 
to the cubic system, for which powder photographs 
should provide sufficient data. A preparation of a 
cubic tobacco seed globulin isolated by H. S. Vickery 
of the Rockefeller Institute, New York, was given to 
us by Dr. D. M. Wrinch, and this we have examined 
by the X-ray method in the form of the dry powder.* 
The crystals were very small but well-formed isotropic 
octahedra. 
Three powder lines were recorded on the X-ray 
photographs which correspond in spacing to the first 
three reflections from a cubic face centred lattice of 
dimensions a = 123 A. This value permits us to 
calculate the maximum molecular weight of the 
asymmetric unit as 363,000, accepting the presence of 
only the four molecules in the unit cell required by 
the symmetry, and the density of 1'·287 ± 0·001, 
measured in a sodium phosphate buffer at pH 5 ·0. 
Since the crystals lose 10·4 per cent of their weight 
when dried in a vacuum at 100° due to loss of what 
may be considered water of crystallization, the 
maximum molecular weight of the dried protein may 
be calculated as 325,000. This molecular weight is 
in agreement in order of magnitude with the sedi­
mentation constant of 12·7 x lo-13 found for the 
same protein by J. Philpot in the Department of 
•w. T. Astbury' has previously measured the large angle scattering. 
© 1938 Nature Publishing GroupNo. 3568, MARCH 19, 1938 NATURE 523 
Biochemistry, Oxford, and is similar to those of other 
seed globulins, excelsin and edestin given by Svedberg 
as about 300,0008• The X-ray measurements provide 
some additional evidence to show that the units 
present in these proteins are of very considerable 
size, although at this stage we cannot exclude the 
possibility that the true chemical molecular weight 
of the tobacco seed globulin is a sub-multiple of 
325,000. 
AN X-RAY STUDY OF CHYMOTRYPSIN AND 
H.IEMOGLOBIN 
By Prof • .J. D. Bernal, F.R.S., Dr. I. Fankuchen and 
Max Perutz, Crystallographic Laboratory, Cambridge 
We have recently been fortunate in obtaining 
well-developed crystals of two proteins--chymo­
trypsin and hremoglobin. The former were prepared 
for us by Dr. Northrop of Princeton and the latter 
-methremoglobin of horse-by Dr. Adair at the 
Physiological Laboratories, Cambridge. In both 
cases the crystals were well formed and large (! mm.) 
and well suited for X-ray analysis. 
Chymotrypsin crystallizes in thick diamond-shaped 
plates at first thought to be orthorhombic but after­
wards discovered to be monoclinic twins. It was 
examined both in the native state in its mother liquor• 
and dried. The cell dimensions are a = 49·6 A, 
b = 67·8 A., c = 66·5 A., [3 = 102° for the wet 
crystals, and a= 45 A., b = 62·5 A., c = 57·5 A., [3 = 
112° for the dry. The space group in both cases is 
probably P2 1• The cell volumes are 219,000 and 
151,000 A.• respectively. It is evident that very 
considerable shrinkage takes place on drying, nearly 
all of which is in the direction of the c axis. The 
density of the wet crystals could be measured by the 
methods of Adair and was found to be 1· 277. If we 
assumed four molecules per cell this would give a 
molecular weight including water of crystallization 
of 42,300. In the case of the dry crystals it was 
unfortunately impossible to measure the density on 
account of the difficulty of removing crystallized 
salts. Assuming the density of the dried protein to 
be the same as that of dry insulin, namely, 1·31, tb.e 
molecular weight is 32,000. This value for the 
molecular weight of a protein seems rather lower 
than is usually obtained by the centrifuge method, 
which, however, has not as yet been applied to 
chymotrypsin. It is difficult without a deeper 
analysis to say much about the inner structure of 
the crystals, but the extreme strength of (001) 
indicates a layer structure, while the weakness of 
(hol) when h is odd points to a pseudo-glide plane 
parallel to (010). 
The hremoglobin crystals were found to be mono­
clinic and usually twinned, corresponding very closely 
to the description given by Reichert and Brown•. 
The dimensions are a = 109 A., b = 63·2 A., c = 
54·2 A., [3 = 112° for the wet crystals and a = 102 A., 
b = 56 A., c = 49 A., [3 = 134° for the dry. The space 
group in both cases is 02 with a face-centred pseudo­
hexagonal cell. The cell volumes are 348,000 and 
202,000 respectively. Here the shrinkage takes place 
apparently more by the increase of the [3 angle 
rather than by the shortening of cell edges. The 
density of the wet crystals is 1·242, which gives a 
molecular weight of protein and water on the assump­
tion of two molecules per cell of 131,000. The molecular 
weight of the dry crystals has not been determined 
on account of the salt content, but taking the value Fia. l. 
WET HlEMOGLOBIN CRYSTAL; 5° OSCILLATION ABOOT 
b-AXIS SHOWING (hko)-ZONE AT CENTRE OF PHOTOGRAPH. 
NOTE THE PSEUDO-HEXAGONAL CHARACTER OF THE 
PATTERN AND THE INTENSITY OF THE REFLECTIONS AT 
HIGH ANGLES. 
of 1·26 based on that measured by Chick and Martin• 
for the closely similar serum albumin, the molecular 
weight is 77,000. The air-dried crystals still contain 
water. Taking the amount estimated byHaurowitz10 
as 9·6 per cent, the molecular weight of the dry 
protein becomes 69,000, which agrees excellently 
with the 67,000 found by chemical methods. 
The molecular arrangement appears to be based 
on a layer lattice with a puckered pseudo-hexagonal 
network. In the dry crystals it is possible to arrive 
at a structure which accounts qualitatively for the 
Q.• •A• I• f 
 :2. 
COMPARISON PHOTOGRAPH OF CHYMOTRYPSIN: WET 
BELOW AND DRY ABOVE ; 5° OSCILLATION ABOUT b-AXIS 
SHOWING AT CENTRE OF PHOTOGRAPH THE (okl)·ZONE. 
NOTE LARGE DIFFERENCE OF SPACING OF (00l)·REFLEC· 
TIONS ( t 1) AND COMPARATIVELY SMALL DIFFERENCE OF 
LAYER-LINE SEPARATION. THE WET CRYSTAL WAS A 
TWIN; THE (lkl)·REFLECTIONS SHOW DOUBLING OF SPOTS 
( t 2). THE RAPID FALLING OFF OF INTENSITY IN THE DRY 
CRYSTAL PHOTOGRAPHS SHOULD BE NOTED. THERE IS 
ALSO THE APPEARANCE OF WEAK SPOTS AT A LARGER 
ANGLE, CORRESPONDING TO A SPACING OF 5 A. ( t 
© 1938 Nature Publishing Group524 NATURE MARCH 19, 1938, VoL. 141 
intensities of all the observed planes. In this structure 
the asymmetric unit is a half molecule of approximate 
diameter 35 A., linked with three others. The molecule 
observed in solution may be formed of two of these. 
The optical properties of the wet crystal point to 
the approximate parallelism of the hrematin groups 
which lie approximately parallel to the (100) planes. 
As yet their position cannot be inferred, but owing 
to the two-fold axis of symmetry which the double 
molecule possesses, only two different kinds ofhrematin 
globin arrangements are possible. In the meantime, 
it is possible to draw some useful conclusions from 
the character of the photographs. In both cases the 
wet crystals showed perfectly definite reflections at 
spacings "'· as low as 2 A. This proves the complete 
internal regularity of the protein molecules down to 
atomic dimensions. The dry crystals, on the other 
hand, show in the case of hremoglobin no reflections 
of spacing less than 20 A, and for chymotrypsin, 
except for one or two weak reflections at 5 A., none 
below 8 A. Dr. Crowfoot had already noticed this 
phenomenon for insulin and more recently for 
lactoglobulin. The explanation is probably some­
what as follows. The intensity of a reflection from a 
protein crystal may be considered a function of three 
factors : the structure factor due to the position of 
the molecules, that due to the positions of the atoms 
inside the molecule, and a third factor depending on 
the regularity of arrangement. It is apparent that 
there is a general enhancement of spots in the regions 
of 9 A. and 4·5 A. corresponding to the two main 
reflections maxima of denatured proteins. In the 
dry protein, however, the irregularity is such that 
only the first of these is retained, the spots corre­
sponding to the outer rim being generally too weak 
to register. If this analysis is correct, it follows that 
the change involved on denaturation does not require 
any considerable movement of atoms or amino-acid residues, but only relatively minor rearrangement 
together with almost complete loss of regularity, the 
dry protein representing an intermediate stage. 
As can be seen from Fig. 2 the dried crystals of 
chymotrypsin show not only alterations of spacing 
but also of relative intensities of reflection. If we 
assume that drying takes place by the removal of 
water from between protein molecules, studies of 
these changes provide an opportunity of separating 
the effects of inter- and intra-molecular scattering. 
This may make possible the direct Fourier analysis 
of the molecular structure once complete sets of 
reflections are available in different states ofhydration. 
Already sufficient protein crystals have been 
examined by X-rays to be able to point to significant 
regularities. The table of lattice dimensions referred 
to three axes at right angles shows that the proteins 
fall into two groups: pseudo-hexagonal and pseudo­
cubic, in both cases with a side of 60-75 A. This is 
of the order of twice the diameter of a protein 
molecule. 
The work already done shows the wealth of new 
data that can be obtained by X-ray methods 
from reasonably well-crystallized proteins. The full 
advantage of the possibilities can, however, only be 
realized by work on a far larger number of protein 
types under different physical conditions, together 
with a mol-e detailed application of crystal analysis. 
1 J. Bioi. Chem., 104, 359 (1934). 
'Proc. Roy. Soc., B, 120, 422 (1936). 
' Pedersen, K. 0., Biochem. J., 30, 961 (1936). 
• Proe. Rotf. Soc., A., 164, 580 (1938). 
• J. Chem. Soc., 849 (1935). 
• Chem. Rev., 20, 81 (1937). 
7 Bernal, J.D., and Crowfoot, D., NATURE, 133, 794-(1934). 
'Reichert and Brown, "The Crystallography of Hemoglobin". Carnegie Inst. of Washington (1909). 
• Chick and Martin, Biochem. J., 7, 92 (1913). 
10 Haurowitz, F., Z. Physiol. Chem., 136, 147. 
Asymmetric-Sideband Broadcasting 
AT a meeting of the Wireless Section of the In­
stitution of Electrical Engineers on March 2, Mr. 
P. P. Eckersley read a paper entitled•"A Quantitative 
Study of Asymmetric-Sideband Broadcasting". This 
paper directed attention to the fact that the progress 
of radio broadcasting is being hampered by the lack 
of a sufficient number of channels in which to contain 
the increasing number of transmissions. In the 
present state of the art, few, except local, stations 
can be received without interference from other 
broadcasting stations on adjacent frequency channels, 
unless the upper modulation frequencies of the 
wanted programme are severely attenuated. This 
inter-station interference can be reduced if all or 
part of one sideband of the transmitted spectrum is 
cut away ; and it is the object of the asymmetric­
sideband system of transmission to cut away part of 
one sideband without loss of the higher modulation 
frequencies and without introducing audible harmonic 
distortion. 
Mr. Eckersley then gave a quantitative analysis of 
the phase and amplitudes of the sideband components 
and the effect of these factors in producing distortion. 
Curves have been derived, which show the required 
attenuation-constant of filters which cut away part 
of one sideband but produce no more than a constant, small distortion. A description was also given of 
practical tests in which the quality of reproduction 
obtainable from an asymmetric transmitter was 
compared with that given by orthodox modulation. 
It is claimed that while a highly trained ear may 
occasionally be able to detect some slight differences 
between the two types of reproduction when they 
are directly compared, no difference is detectable 
with modern broadcast receiving apparatus. 
The last part of the paper showed that the 
asymmetric system has three possible applications to 
broadcasting as it is practised to-day. First, it could 
be used to allow carrier frequency differences of II 
or I2 kc.fsec. without introducing any sideband 
overlap interference. Secondly, it could be applied 
to existing conditions in which the carrier frequencies 
differ by about 9 kc.fsec., and it would then reduce 
inter-station interference to about one tenth of its 
present value. Thirdly, if the existing interferences 
are considered to be tolerable, then the differences 
between the carrier-frequencies of stations can be 
reduced to 6 kc.fsec., without increasing the inter­
ference ; this implies that one and a half times the 
number of stations working in Europe to-day on 
exclusive wave-length channels could be accom­
modated "in the existing wave-band. 
