©          Nature Publishing Group1970NATURE VOL 225 JANUARY 17 1970 233 
The Structure of Thiostrepton 
by 
BRYAN ANDERSON 
DOROTHY CROWFOOT HODGKIN 
M. A. VISWAMITRA* 
Chemical Crystallography Laboratory, 
University of Oxford Much of the chemical structure of thiostrepton, a sulphur con­
taining metabolic product of the microorganism Streptomyces azureus, 
has been determined by X-ray crystallographic techniques. 
THIOSTREPTON, which has been shown to be identical with 
bryamycin and thiactin ', was first isolated from Strepto­
myces a.zureus in 1954 (refs. 2-4); it was quickly found to 
possess marked antibiotic properties with a spectrum of 
activity against Gram-positive bacteria comparable 
with that of penicillin•. Unfortunately, because of its 
very low solubility in aqueous systems, the antibiotic 
induces resistance to itself in the bacteria before its 
concentration becomes therapeutically sufficient and it 
has not so far been developed for medical purposes. 
Chemically, however, tho compound has proved to be of 
considerable interest. Degradation studies proved it to 
have the characteristics of a much modified peptide" 
containing a large proportion of sulphur held in thiazole 
rings6• Experiments carried out chiefly by Bodanszky6 
and Kenner' showed that the products of acid hydrolysis 
included a number of derivativ es of thiazole-4-carboxylic 
acid as well as 4-(IX-hydrox yethyl)-8-hydroxyquinaldic 
acid, pyruvic acid and several amino-acids (Table 1). 
The molecular weight, estimated by therrnoelectric means•, 
was l, 627 and combustion analysis suggested empirical 
formulae ranging between C69H91N18022S5 (ref. 9) and 
C72H83N,00,,S5 (ref. 6). The large size of the molecule 
and the variety of its hydrolysis products made the full 
determination of its chemical structur e by degradation 
very difficult and X-ray crystallographic analysis has 
therefore been attempted. 
Thiostrepton, as it was first obtained, crystallized from 
dimethyl sulphoxide or dimethylformamide-80 per cent 
acetone solution in tetragonal prisms. Attempts to 
introduce heavy atoms into the crystals by chemical 
or other means failed but led to the discovery of a second 
modification, a monoclinic form, which crystallized from 
dimethylformamide-dry acetone solutions and presented 
a somewhat simpler problem for structure solutions. 
For these crystals the SRace group is C2; a= 21·757 A, b= 
22·846 A, C=23·523 .A; [3= 103·93°; Z=4; dm= 1·41 
gfcm3; weight per asymmetric unit= 2,420. The intensi­
ties of reflexions out to spacings of 1 A were measured 
with an automatic four circle diffractometer and copper 
KIX X-radiation; these intensities, after processing, yielded 
a set of 5,600 independent data of which 4,520 intensiti es 
were greater than 2·5 sigma. These significant data were 
used to calculate a sharpened, three-dimensional Patterson 
synthesis, from which it was possible by the use of multiple 
superpositions to identify tho positions of four of the 
sulphur atoms. A Fourier synthesis, phased from these 
coordinates and weighted by the method of Sim, indicated 
the positions of twenty light atoms in chemically reasonable 
locations. Repeated cycles of structure factors and 
Fourier summations then led to the gradual development 
of a structure containing five sulphur and one hundred 
lighter atoms. 
• P1·esent address: Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore. This structure was initially refined by calculations of 
structure factor least squares using block diagonal 
approximations and assuming that all the non-sulphur 
atoms were carbons. Examination of the apparent 
temperature factors then enabled most of the atoms to be 
sorted into carbons, nitrogens and oxygens. V\1here the 
results seemed equivocal the apparent bonding around the 
atom concerned usually enabled its chemical character 
to be assigned. Further cycles of refinement led to the 
placing of five more atoms belonging to the molecule and 
thirty-four-probably solvent-atoms with low occupation 
numbers and high temperature factors. The refinement 
now seems to have converged to a reliability factor of 
0·152 for the 4,520 significant refiexions. Almost all bond 
lengths and angles are within three sigma of their expected 
values and the whole structur e forms a chemically reason­
able molecule. Difference maps now reveal no peaks 
above 0·5 e cm-3 although the weight of the placed atoms 
is considerably less than that measured for the asymmetric 
unit. The lack of recognizabl e structure beyond the limits 
of the molecule forces us to conclude that about 30 per 
cent of the crystal is composed of disordered solvent. 
c 
Fig. 1. a 
The alanyl-a aminoacrylalanyl moiety from the F-obsernd 
Fourier map of thiostrepton. Contours at 1 e A-'. 
©          Nature Publishing Group1970234 
Table 1. THE PRINCIPAL FMGliENTS OBTAINED ON HYDROLYSIS OF 
THIOSTREPTON 
(-)-Alanine 
(-)-Threonine 
( -)-Isoleucine (2 moles) 
(1 mole) 
(1 mole) 
(+)-Cysteine ( < 1 mole) 
Pyruvic acid (2 moles) 
Ammonia (4-5 moles) 
OH 
4-(a-Hydmxyethyl)-8-hydroxyqulnaldlc 
acid. 
Thiostreptoic acid. 
2-Propionylthiazole-4-carboxylic acid. 
2-(1-Amino-2-carboxycthyl)thiawle-
4-carboxylic acid. 
Fig. 1 is a composite of sections 
taken from part of one of the final 
Fourier syntheses showing a portion 
of peptide chain. 
These calculations led to the 
arrangement of atoms shown in 
Fig. 2 with the empirical formula 
CaDHs,Nt80lsS6 and a molecular 
weight of 1,616. The structure pre­
sented regions which could be cone­
lated with all the previously known 
degradation products listed in Table 
1 and have been marked accord­
ingly in Fig. 2. Most of these were 
immediately obvious to us; other 
identifications such as those of the 
residues of 01:-aminoacrylic acid at 
A, of dehydrobut,yrine at B and 
the ester linkage at a followed from 
discussions with Dr Sheppard and Threonine 
(+)-Cysteine NATURE VOL. 225 JANUARY 17 1970 
Dr Bodanszky and reference to later chemical work10• 
There is one region of the structure which has presented 
some difficulty. Thiostreptoic acid, which is obtained in 7 6 
per cent yield on treatment of thiostrepton with concen­
trated acids•, must be derived from the region of the mole­
cule marked in Fig. 2. If, however, peracid oxidation pre­
cedes the hydrolysis, this compound is not produced, but 
instead a new diacid, 2-(1-arnino-2-carboxyethyl)thiazole-
4-carboxylic acid, can be isolated". Neither of these com­
pounds is an obvious hydrolysis product of the thiostropton 
molecule and their isolation suggests that the double 
bond must shift to allow the reduced pyridine ring to be 
degraded in two different ways. To exclude the possibility 
that another oxygenated function occurred in this region 
but had been missed in the first calculations, a difference 
map was calculated. Tho nineteen light atoms in the 
nitrogen containing six membered ring and the adjacent 
thiazoles were removed from the phasing calculation; all 
reappeared in the resulting difference electron density 
(Fig. 3), unaccompanied by an additional atom. This 
map has also confirmed the position of the double bond 
in the six membered ring. We therefore propose for 
the major part of thiostrepton the chemical formulation 
shown in Fig. 2 which is in agreement with the intra­
atomic distances in the refined structure. 
Some doubt remains about the nature of the five 
terminal atoms of the long side chain. Intramolecular 
forces stabilize the main part of the molecule, but the 
linear part extends into a pool of disordered solvent which 
provides little to constrain the atoms of tho chain. The 
increase in temperature factor with distance from the 
bridgehead indicates the presence of considerable disorder. 
In this region, therefore, bond lengths and angles and 
indeed atom type cannot be determined at all precisely 
and the final five atom fragment has been characterized 
from the chemistry as much as from the crystallography. 
Hydrolysis experiments yield two moles of pyruvic Mid", 
Thio~treptine • 0 
0 
Fig. 2. The chemical structure of thiostrepion. Nitrogen 
Oxygen 
Sulphur 
©          Nature Publishing Group1970NATURE VOL. 225 JANUARY 17 1970 
one originating from the cx-aminoacrylyl moiety in the 
cyclic part of the molecule and the other presumably from 
the side chain part of the structure. Fourier syntheses of 
this region of the crystal reveal only five atom peaks with 
the central two surrounded by approximately planar 
configurations, and because thiostrepton contains no free 
carboxyl groups• this terminal residue has been tentatively 
assigned as an ct-aminoacrylamide group. Recent work by 
Dr Bodanszky and co-workers (personal communication} 
suggests, however, that thiostrepton may contain another 
one or two alanine precursors. These, if they occur, must 
be an extension of the long side chain and are completely 
disordered within the solvent pool between the molecules. 
We therefore feel we cannot yet claim that Fig. 2 repre­
sents the whole of the thiostrepton molecule but hope that 
an examination of the structure of the tetragonal crystal 
form will provide a final answer. 
The pair of stereographic drawings in Fig. 4 show the 
three dimensional nature of the structure. It can be 
derived from a single polypeptide chain which has been 
combined with a substituted quinaldic acid and then 
cyclized to form two large rings with a linear "tail" 
extending from the junction point. The peptide units 
have been variously modified; cysteine residues appear 
cyclized to thiazoline and thiazole rings, hydroxylation 
has produced a dihydroxyisoleucine while dehydrogena­
tions have given rise to an cx-aminodehydrobutyryl residue 
and two cx-aminoacrylyl groups. The stereoscopic view 
shows clearly that the thiazoline ring asymmetric carbon 
atom is opposite in hand from those of the remaining 
amino-acid residues; this is in agreement with the fact 
that the alanine, threonine and isoleucine residues are all 
observed to be (-), while one (+)-cysteine, which is 
produced by hydrolysis of the 
thiazoline ring, has been ob-235 
c 
Fig. 3. Composite drawing of part of the difference map of thiostrepton 
showing: the reappearance of the nineteen atoms omitted from the 
phasing. Contours at 0·5• ,A ..a. 
tained. As a whole the mole­
cule appears roughly globular, 
with the two large rings folded 
over one another and the long 
side chain protruding from 
their junction. The conforma­
tion is maintained by a 
number of intramolecular 
hydrogen bonds which bind 
the whole into a very compact 
structure. The "lynch pin" 
of the conformation is an 
oxygen atom (presumably a 
water molecule) which, al­
though not chemically bonded 
to the structure, is placed 
within hydrogen bonding dis­
tance of a ring nitrogen 
(2·95 A), a peptide nitrogen Fig. 4. Pair of stereographic drawings showing the thiostrepton molecule as viewed down the a axle. 
(3·34 A) and a hydroxyl oxygen (2·72 A}. It is thus 
primarily responsible for holding the "wings" of the 
structure together, and with a fourth hydrogen bond it 
links to a carbonyl oxygen on an adjacent molecule. 
Such a structure seems at first to be a possibly isolated 
curiosity of nature. Several of its features have, however, 
been found in other peptide antibiotics. Even the con­
troversial region from which thiostreptoic acid is derived 
can be compared with the very similar atomic arrange­
ment found in micrococcinic acid11, a major degradation 
product of micrococcin P, and can be derived frmn a 
precursor closely allied to those of penicillin N and 
cephalosporin C (ref. 12). 
This problem was suggested to us by Dr Bodanszky; 
we should like to thank both him and Dr Sheppard for 
their interest and advice and Mr John Hodder for help in 
the computations. We are grateful for research grants 
from the Science Research Council and from tbe Squibb 
Institute for Medical Research, which in addition gave us 
the thiostrepton. We also thank Messrs Hilger and Watts 
for allowing us to carry out all the measurements we made on the four-circle diffractometer in their works 
laboratory. 
Received December 5. 1969. 
1 Bodanszky, M., Dutcher, J. D., and Williams, N. J., J. Antibiotics. 16, 76 (1963). 
'Pagano, J. F .• Weinstein, ]If. J., Stout, M.A., and Donovick, R., Antibiotics Ann., 554 (1956). 
'Vandeputte, J., and Dutcher, J.D., Antibiotics Ann., 560 (1956). 
'Steinberg, B. A., Jambar, W.P., and Suydam, L.'O., Antibiotics Ann., 562 (1956). . 
'Kutscher, A. H., Seguin. L., Rankow, R. llf., and lPiro, J.' D., 'Antibiot. Ohemother., 8, 576 (1958). · 
• Bodanszky. M., Fried, J., Sheehan J. T., Williams, N. J., Alicino. J. 
Cohen, P. I., Keeler, B. T., and Birkhimer, C. A., J. A.mel'. Ohem. soc.' 86, 2478 (1964). • 
' Gross. D. F. W., Kenner, G. W., Sheppard, R. C., and Stehr, C. E., J. Ohem. Soc., 2143 (1963). · 
'McKenna, M.A. thesis (Liverpool, 1964). 
' Stehr, C. E., thesis (Liverpool, 1961). 
10 Bodanszky, M., Scozzie, J. A., and Murumatsu, I., J. A.mer. Ohem. Soc., 91, 4934 (1969). 
"James, M. N. G., and Watson, K. J., J. Chem. Soc. (c), 1361 (1966). 
"Abraham, E. P., and Newton, G. G. F., .Antibiotics (edit. by Gottlieb, D .• and Shaw, P. D.), 2 (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1967). 
