© 1945 Nature Publishing Group504 NATURE APRIL 28, 1945, VoL. 155 
X-RAY CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC 
MEASUREMENTS ON A SINGLE 
CRYSTAL OF A TOBACCO 
NECROSIS VIRUS DERIVATIVE 
By DOROTHY CROWFOOT 
AND 
G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
Laboratory of Chemical Crystallography, Oxford 
IN August I944, N. W. Pirie, of Rothamsted, sent 
us a few large crystals of a tobacco necrosis virus 
derivative (Rothamsted strain)1 on which we have 
been able to make some X-ray measurements. 
Before we could complete the investigation the pre­
paration unfortunately deteriorated, but the crystals 
are in themselves so rema.rkable that it seems worth 
while to give a preliminary account of their charac­
teristics, They are described as of a crystalline 
derivative rather than as crystals of the virus itself, 
since by the time the preparation had crystallized it 
had lost its infectivity. It shows, however, the same 
serological and ultracentrifugal behaviour as the 
active material and so probably does not differ 
greatly from this2• The molecular weight indicated 
by the sedimentation is at least 1,850,000, 
and this order of magnitude is confirmed by our 
present measurements. 
The crystals were of quite unusual size, 1-5 mm. 
across, and appeared to be of two forms, thick tri­
clinic prisms and thin hexagonal or pseudo-hexagonal 
plates. They had been grown for more than a year 
from aqueous solution, and when received were 
adhering to the walls of the tube covered with a film 
of moisture. The thickest crystal of all, which was 
of the first kind and measured approximately 
2 mm. x 1 mm. x 0·5 mm., was washed into a drop 
of 1/10 saturated ammonium sulphate solution and 
drawn into a thin-walled Lindemann glass capillary 
which was then sealed off. In this tube it could be 
examined still covered with a film of liquid. 
In form the crystal was a thick prism tending to 
be elongated along [111] and bounded by well-defined 
faces, probably {011}, {flO} and {ioi}. In polarized 
Fig. 1. TOBACCO NECROSIS VIRUS DERIVATIVE. 
21• oscillation photograph, crystal rotating about normal to 
(001), x-ray beam parallel to (100). 90 hours exposure. light it showed low birefringence with oblique extinc­
tion when viewed parallel to ( 100), and approximately 
straight extinction along [Ill] when viewed per­
pendicular to (100), which suggested monoclinic or 
pseudo-monoclinic symmetry. These measurements 
could not be made very accurately owing to the 
position of the crystal in the tube. But in essentials 
they are confirmed by the X-ray data, which show 
that the crystal is triclinic, with a = 179 A., 
b = 219 A., C = 243 A., ot = 87!0
, (' = 97f0
, y = 97t0 
(reduced cell), space group Pl; and that there is a 
marked approach to monoclinic symmetry, which is 
better illustrated by adopting the larger unit cell 
a' = 179 A., b' = 303 A., c' = 346 A., oc' = 96°, (" = 
10 I o, y' = 90°, space group A 1. In the account 
which follows, the indices given "refer to the pseudo­
monoclinic cell. 
In order to measure these very large ceil dimen­
sions, using copper KrT. radiation, five 2!0 oscillation 
(a) (b) 
Fig. 2. TOBACCO NECROSIS VIRUS IJERIVATIVE . 
(a) Crystal 'still'. X-ray beam nearly perpendicular to (h*OO). 
Rellexions from (h*OO). 12 hours eXposure. 
(b) Crystal 'still' . X-ray beam 60° from (h*OO). Rellexlons 
from (h*OO), (4h*k*O), (3h*k*O). 10 hours exposure. 
photographs were taken of the crystal rotated about 
the normal to (001), with a plate-to-crystal distance 
of 10·1 em. (Fig. 1). The X-ray beam was defined by 
a lead glass capillary of bore 0 ·025 em. kindly lent 
to us by Dr. W. T. Astbury. With this slit system 
there is some blurring of neighbouring hkl reflexions 
for which the index k varies only by 1, since the 
interval, b = 303 A., is outside the theoretical limit 
of resolution ; but since there are sharp reflexions 
with indices Okl differing by various multiples of k, 
the lattice is defined unambiguously. Apart from 
this difficulty, the patterns of the X-ray reflexions 
on the oscillation photographs are exactly com­
parable with those found on simpler crystals, the 
only difference being one scale. 
This difference of scale makes it possible, however, 
for us to estimate the unit cell dimensions in quite a 
different way on a new variety of X-ray photograph. 
The unit cell dimensions are so large that , even when 
the crystal is kept stationary, innumerable crystal 
planes are geometrically in a position to reflect 
monochromatic X-rays. Photographs obtained with 
the crystal 'still' accordingly show numbers of X-ray 
reflexions, and these, though individually unresolved, 
are characteristically arranged on. the plate in series 
of concentric circles, or ellipses (Fig. 2). Their 
arrangement is most easily understood by referring 
the process of reflexion in the usual way to the inter­
action of the crystal reciprocal lattice with the sphere 
of reflexion8·'· In reciprocal space the lattice points 
Sl"e crowded together so that many will be in contact 
with the sphere of reflexion in any position of the 
© 1945 Nature Publishing GroupNo. 3939, APRIL 28, 1945 NATURE 505 
crystal relative to the X-ray beam. The points are, 
however, grouped into reciprocal lattice planes, and 
these intersect the sphere of reflexion in circles, 
where the interval between two concentric circles 
depends on the spacing of the series of parallel 
reciprocal lattice planes and hence inversely on the 
crystal cell dimensions. The diagrams in Fig. 3 
illustrate the process. 
JlSinceJonly reciprocal lattice planes with large 
spacings and in a position not far from normal to the 
' I ' ,---- .... 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
\ ' ' ......... __ , 
(a} Beam 
direction Beam direction 
p p 
(b) 
Fig. 3. INTERACTION OF RECIPROCAL LATTICE PLANES WITH THE SPHERE OF REFLEXION (a) IN PERSPECTIVE, (b) IN PROJECTIO!{. 
AA', IJB', 00', reciprocal lattice planes; 0, centre of sphere of reflexion; PP', photographic plate. 
beam direction can give well-defined circles or 
ellipses when projected on to the photographic plate, 
three or four 'still' photographs at intervals of 30° or 
so serve to define the lattice normal to any particular 
rotation axis. In the present case we first deduced 
two of the three reciprocal cell dimensions from a 
series of 'still' photographs which showed reflexions 
from the reciprocal lattice planes (h*OO), (Ok*O), 
(h*k*O), (h*k*O), (2h*k*O), (3h*k*O), ( 4h*k*O), (h*2k*O) 
and (3h*2k*O), and afterwards took the oscillation 
photographs when we knew the degree of resolution 
we should need. With our apparatus a good 'still' 
photograph at a plate-to-crystal distance of 4 em. 
could be obtained in twelve hours, while the best 
oscillation photograph took ninety hours. As these 
exposure times with our X-ray tubes were so long, 
we transferred the crystal, at the kind invitation of 
Sir Henry Dale, to the Davy Faraday Laboratory, at 
the Royal Institution, London, for photography with 
a more powerful tube. One trial photograph was 
taken in four hours, but at this stage an accident to 
the crystal prevented further work. In all, the crystal 
was exposed for approximately five hundred hours to 
X-radiation without apparent deterioration. 
While the 'still' photographs provide good evidence 
on the cell dimensions, we have to turn to our very 
limited series of oscillation photographs for further 
details of the crystal structure. One striking feature 
of the X-ray photograph reproduced (Fig. 1) is the 
absence of a number of reflexions, hOl, where h is 
odd, which suggests that there is a pseudo-glide 
plane of symmetry present and that the arrange­
ment of the molecules in the crystal approximates to 
that required by the space group Aa. In this event 
there must be four units in the face-centred unit cell 
Qr two in the primitive cell measured above. In the 
absence of measurements of crystal density and of 
water content, we can only give a rough estimate for 
this unit molecular weight based on measurements of these quantities on other virus crystals. If we take 
the figures for the crystalline bushy stunt virus5, water 
content 55 per cent, density 1·286, the molecular 
weight of the tobacco necrosis virus derivative can 
be calculated as 1;600,000. But since the nucleic acid 
content of tobacco necrosis virus is higher than that 
of bushy stunt virus, it is probable that the density 
is greater, and this figure may therefore be regarded 
as a lower limit for its molecular weight. As such it 
nompares well with the ultracentrifuge figure given 
above, 1,850,000, which is also a lower limit calcu­
lated8 for a spherical molecule with the observed 
sedimentation constant, 50 X I0-13,1 Actually the 
crystal structure suggests that the molecules do not 
differ in shape very markedly from spheres. On this 
view the estimated molecular dimensions vary from 
about 80 A. as a minimum radius to a possible 
maximum of 100 A. radius in one direction. 
The presence of even a pseudo-glide plane of sym­
metry in the crystal structure of a molecule certainly 
containing asymmetric centres may appear at first 
sight odd. But this effect again must be due to the 
enormous size of the molecule. It has only been 
observed so far for reflexions with spacings greater 
than 25 A., and the intensities of these can be 
sensitive to little more than the general shape and 
position of the molecules in the unit cell. With fresh 
material we hope to be able to extend our survey of 
the X-ray reflexions and to obtain a better idea of 
the actual dimensions of the virus molecule. That 
the required X-ray data can be got is proved by the 
'still' photographs, which show X-ray reflexions from 
planes with spacings as small as 2 ·8 A. 
1 Bawden, F. C., and Pirie, N. W., Brit. J. Exp. Path., 23, 314 (194o2). 
• Bawden, F. C., and Pirie, N. W., to be published shortly. 
'Ewald, P. P., Z. Krist., 56, 129 (1921). 
'Bernal, J. D., Proc. Roy. Soc., .A, 113, 117 (1926). 
• Bernal, J. D., and Fankuchen, I., J. Gen. Physiol., 25, 111 (194ol). 
., Ogston, .A. G., private communication. 
