© 1956 Nature Publishing Group64 NATURE July 14, 1956 VOL. 176 
is that the National Milk Testing Service with its 
350 staff should be disbanded and its work handed 
over to the Milk Marketing Board and the Veterinary 
Inspectorate. It was always difficult to see any real 
justification for the existence of the National Milk 
Testing Service. 
In conclusion, one feature of the reorganization 
planned by the Wilson Committee may be pointed 
out which will please those who, like the writer, 
continue to maintain that the advisory and educa­
tional services should never have been divorced and should be 'remarried' as soon as possible. The County 
Agricultural Committees will remain based, in general, 
on existing counties and will have, as their chief 
concern, technical development and advisory work. 
It would be a small and comparatively easy step to 
add to these duties the responsibility for agricultural 
education in the counties. A great accession of 
strength would accrue to both services and further 
large economies in man-power and expenditure could 
be achieved together with greatly increased efficiency. 
H. w. GARDNER 
STRUCTURE OF VITAMIN 812 
By DR. DOROTHY CROWFOOT HODGKIN, F.R.S., JENNIFER KAMPER, MAUREEN MACKAY 
and JENNY PICKWORTH 
Oxford 
KENNETH N. TRUEBLOOD JOHN G. WHITE 
Los Angeles AND Princeton 
SINCE our communication in August I 955 1, we 
have carried our refinement of the structure of 
vitamin B12 a critical stage further. Four more 
calculations of the electron density distribution have 
been made, one for the wet B 12 crystals, two for air­
dried B12 crystals and one for the hexacarboxylic 
acid. 
In Fig. I are shown the electron density peaks 
over all the atoms of the B12 molecule as it appears 
from our present calculations in the wet crystals. 
(a) These peaks are rather lower than those observed 
for the hexacarboxylic acid owing to the smaller 
number of X-ray reflexions given by' the larger 
molecule in proportion to its size. But they serve to 
show the relative positions of all the atoms in space 
of this very complex molecule within probably as 
little as O ·3 A. Similar evidence has been obtained 
for air-dried B 12 ; for both crystals the reliability 
indices in the latest · structure factor calculations, 
36·1 and 30·6 per cent, respectively, are now low 
(b) 
Fig. 1. .Electron density-levels from the three-dimensional electron density distribution for wet B12 crystals, calculated with terms 
phased on 93 atoms 
Here, and in Fig. 4, the contours are drawn in the sections of the calculated distribution parallel with the a plane, passing at or near the 
atomic positions. Owing to the complexity of the molecule, complete contours for every atom are not given and the figure is divided 
into two parts. (a) shows the cobalt-containing nucleus and cyanide group; (b) the benziminazole, sugar, phosphate and propanol­
amine groups, the side chains being divided between the two. The acetamide chain on ring Bis inset. The contour interval is 1 e/A.' 
© 1956 Nature Publishing GroupNo. 4524 July 14, 1956 NATURE 65 
aL 
C cobalt atom as illustrated by III. 
Some evidence in support of this 
has been obtained by theoretical 
calculations2, by spectroscopic 
measurements• and from further 
chemical studies•. Our own evi­
dence for this formulation is the 
geometrical form of the nucleus, 
which is illustrated by Fig. 3, 
and which is closely similar in 
all three crystals studied. The 
interatomic distances shown in this 
figure are derived from the latest 
calculations on the hexacarboxylic 
acid and are not individually very 
precise ; in other parts of the 
molecule distances differing by 
as much as O • 16 A. from accepted 
bond-lengths have been found. 
But it is notable that in the 
region N6-N 18 all the bond-lengths 
are shorter than normal single 
bond distances ; their average value, 
1·36A., is similar to that found 
in the phthalocyanines&. The 
positions of 029 and 030, one or 
other of which would be expected 
to be out of the plane of the 
central ring system if only five 
double bonds were present, are 
Fig. 2. The atomic positions found in the molecule of vitamin B,.. These are shown as 
derived in the wet crystals, projected on the b plane. To distinguish different parts of 
the molecule, bonds within the cobalt containing nucleus, benzimlnazole and cyanide 
groups are shown in black, together with the cobalt and phosphorus atoms and the 
nitrogen atoms of the nucleus, benziminazole, propanolamine and cyanide groups even more significant. In the 
hexacarboxylic acid they appeared 
at all stages of the refinement 
to be within 0·2 A. of this plane, 
but in the B12 crystals themselves 
their positions were at first more 
enough to indicate that the solution we have reached 
is likely to be essentially correct. 
The molecule that appears is very beautifully 
composed, not far from spherical in form, with all 
the more chemically reactive groups on its surface. 
It is drawn in projection in Fig. 2. It is built around 
the two planes of the benziminazole nucleus and the 
central cobalt-containing nucleus, which are nearly at 
right angles to each other. The ribose ring turns in 
a position nearly normal to the benziminazole group, 
which permits its easy linking through the phosphate, 
propanolamine, and propionic acid residues to ring D 
of the planar group. The benziminazole nucleus is 
packed in on either side l?y the propionamide side­
chains in the extended, staggered configuration, 
attached to rings A and B ; the side-chain on ring 
0, in the gauche configuration, lies above the ribose 
ring. All the acetamide residues project from the 
opposite side of the nucleus to the propionamide 
residues, towards the cyanide group. It is an inter­
esting point that one of them-that on ring B­
swings round the carbon-carbon single bond from a 
position directed away from, to one in contact with, 
the cyanide group, when the crystals are removed 
from their mother liquor ; this permits the rather 
closer packing of the molecules found in the air-dried 
crystals. Throughout the molecule, as shown by 
Figs. I and 2, the atomic positions found conform in 
a most convincing way with the stereochemical rules 
established by the study of simpler molecules. 
It now seems reasonably certain that we should 
formulate vitamin B12, C.8H88014N 14PCo, as in I, and 
the hexacarboxylic acid as in II, with six double 
bonds in the inner ring of the central nucleus ; these 
can form a resonating system by intervention of the confused, particularly 020• As a critical test, 
accordingly, this atom was omitted from the 
phasing calculations used for the latest electron 
distribution calculated for air-dried B12• It has 
now appeared, as Fig. 4 shows, as a small but 
clearly defined peak at a site which is closely 
equivalent to that found in the hexacarboxylic 
(I) 
© 1956 Nature Publishing Group66 NATURE July 14, 1956 VOL. 178 
acid along the line Co to Cs. There is still some 
departure from planar character in this region of the 
inner nucleus in both wet and air-dried crystals, but 
this seems to affect N 10, C9 and C8 as much as C29• 
If real, it may be a consequence of a small amount 
of compression from the benziminazole nucleus, 
which is in contact with these atoms. It is, in any 
event, not of the geometrical form that would be 
expected if Cs were reduced. 
The crystal structures of the different B12 com­
pounds are still not completely solved ; many of the 
water molecules which occupy space between the 
vitamin molecules have been plac,ed, but not all. 
Still further small adjustments are to be expected 
on continued refinement of the atomic positions 
(III) Fig. 3. Interatomic distances found in the inner nucleus of the 
hexacarboxylic acid, derived from nine refinements of the cal­
culated electron density distribution 
Fig. 4. Electron density peaks over the nucleus in air-dried 
vitamin B.,, derived from the three-dimensional electron density 
distribution calculated with terms phased on 95 atoms (Princeton 
data) 
observed. We hope that future calculations will add 
still greater precision and certainty to our knowledge 
of the structure of the molecule. 
The latest series of calculations on wet B12 were 
carried out on the University of Manchester electronic 
computer through the generous co-operation of Dr. 
D. W. J. Cruickshank, Miss Diana Pilling and 
Mr. J. F. P. Donavan, of the University of Leeds. 
Those on air-dried B12 and on the hexacarboxylic 
acid were made on the National Bureau of Standards 
automatic computer in Los Angeles, supported by 
the United States Office of Naval Research. 
Again we acknowledge the very generous support 
given this research by the ;Nuffield Foundation, and 
materials and help given us by Dr. E. Lester Smith, 
Glaxo Laboratories, Ltd., and Dr. K. Folkers, Merck 
Laboratories. Two of us (J. P. and J. K.) received 
grants from the Department of Scientific and Indus­
trial Research. 
1 Nature, 176, 325 (1955). 
' Orgel, L. E. (private communication). 
• Beaven, G. H., and Johnson, E. A., Nature, 176, 1264 (1955). 
• Todd, A. R. (private communication). 
• Robertson, J. M., J. Chem. Soc., 1195 (1936). Robertson, J.M., and 
Woodward, I., ibid., 219 (1937). 
